[Amit Varma]: There is a lot that is wrong with the world, and it's important to put a number to it.
[Amit Varma]: You know, we are often suspicious of numbers.
[Amit Varma]: They confuse us, and when they are big, they become abstractions that our brains are not
[Amit Varma]: designed to fathom.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, if we want the whole truth, and not just a glimpse of it, we need numbers.
[Amit Varma]: I may feel that gender and caste are India's biggest problems, and you may feel that here
[Amit Varma]: they are not so bad, but the only legit way for us to try and convince each other is through
[Amit Varma]: numbers.
[Amit Varma]: My anecdote versus your anecdote gets us nowhere.
[Amit Varma]: And no one knows this better than my guest on this episode, who shed light on important
[Amit Varma]: questions and important arguments about caste and gender.
[Amit Varma]: Her work means that we cannot deny the problem exists, and we can use her data to tackle
[Amit Varma]: these problems better.
[Amit Varma]: If things are wrong, and you want to set them right, you need the right numbers.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Ashwini Deshpande, the only economist in the world to have been on an
[Amit Varma]: Amul hoarding.
[Amit Varma]: Ashwini was born to a remarkable family.
[Amit Varma]: You could make multiple web series on her aazobas and aajis, grandparents who tried
[Amit Varma]: to reform society and led by example.
[Amit Varma]: Her dad was a famous playwright and academic, J.P. Deshpande, and her mom was a well-known
[Amit Varma]: women's rights activist.
[Amit Varma]: Ashwini could have been a vocalist or a sitar player or a writer, but she took one for the
[Amit Varma]: team, by which I mean all of us, and became an economist.
[Amit Varma]: She spent decades doing path-breaking work in caste and gender, among other subjects.
[Amit Varma]: She's a professor at the Ashoka University and lifetime president of the global Lata
[Amit Varma]: Mangeshkar fan club.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, fine, I made that last line up, but it's plausible as you'll find out.
[Amit Varma]: We met a week before this recording at a conference in Goa, where she both sang Madanmohan songs
[Amit Varma]: as well as gave a presentation on her academic work that blew us away.
[Amit Varma]: This conversation also contains multitudes, and I'd urge you to see it as part of a larger
[Amit Varma]: interconnected conversation I've had on these subjects with various other guests.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, the episode I released two weeks ago with the great Dalit scholar and activist
[Amit Varma]: Chandrabhan Prasad was actually recorded after this one, but there are threads that intermingle.
[Amit Varma]: Anyway, recording this was a blast, so listen in.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer, but never quite gotten down to it?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I'd love to help you.
[Amit Varma]: Since April 2020, I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course, The Art of Clear Writing.
[Amit Varma]: An online community has now sprung up of all my past students.
[Amit Varma]: We have workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students, and vibrant community
[Amit Varma]: interaction.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know
[Amit Varma]: about the craft and practice of clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: There are many exercises, much interaction, a lovely and lively community at the end of
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: The course costs Rs. 10,000 plus GST, or about $150, and is a monthly thing.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're interested, head on over to register at indiauncut.com slash clearwriting.
[Amit Varma]: That's indiauncut.com slash clearwriting.
[Amit Varma]: Being a good writer doesn't require God-given talent, just the willingness to work hard
[Amit Varma]: and a clear idea of what you need to do to refine your skills.
[Amit Varma]: I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Ashwini, welcome to The Scene and The Unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit.
[Guest]: It's so fabulous to be here.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for inviting me.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, and I'm sure it is also fabulous to be here.
[Amit Varma]: So we've been talking about this for a long time.
[Amit Varma]: And there's also excitement that I get in my DMs from Twitter, when is it out?
[Amit Varma]: When is it out?
[Amit Varma]: I haven't even recorded yet, because I posted this video of you singing this beautiful song,
[Amit Varma]: I think by Madan Mohan, you know, at this conference we were at.
[Amit Varma]: And there has been so much enthusiasm.
[Amit Varma]: People have got in touch asking about commercial possibilities, and so on and so forth, concerts.
[Amit Varma]: And I have been like, you know, at the Royal Alfred Hall, for example.
[Amit Varma]: And I have been like, okay, you know, I'm her agent, I will take 80% commission, you
[Amit Varma]: know, and I'm game with it.
[Guest]: So we can discuss.
[Guest]: Alfred, you mean Albert, obviously, no, I deliberately said Alfred, because this is
[Amit Varma]: what happens in India, no one understands satire.
[Guest]: Oh, now you're on fact checking.
[Guest]: No, really, sorry, I'm going to keep my teacher hat aside.
[Amit Varma]: And no, no, I will ask you in this episode also to put the teacher hat on because at
[Amit Varma]: the conference where we were, you gave this excellent talk where I learned so much, you
[Amit Varma]: know, I read your book also, which was delightful and a whole bunch of articles, not all of
[Amit Varma]: which are to do with your field of study.
[Amit Varma]: So that was sort of great fun.
[Amit Varma]: I want to go back to sort of talking about your childhood, there's a delightful piece
[Amit Varma]: in your book on caste, where right at the start, you speak about your paternal grandparents,
[Amit Varma]: Asha Tai and Purushottam Narahardesh Pandey.
[Amit Varma]: And I found that really interesting.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to dig deeper into that.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about, you know, your memories of them, and you know, what were
[Guest]: they like, and so on?
[Guest]: Well, they were absolutely remarkable individuals and actually their love story and true, I
[Guest]: mean, I'm using the word correctly in the sense that there was a love marriage back
[Guest]: in the day, their love story should be actually made into a movie or something.
[Guest]: So my paternal grandfather, who we used to call Anna, Azoba is in Marathi, it's called,
[Guest]: you know, his grandfather.
[Guest]: So Anna Azoba, and then as we became older, we just called him Anna because everybody
[Guest]: in the village called him Anna.
[Guest]: Anna's father settled in this small town village called Rahimathpur, which is in Satara district
[Guest]: of Western Maharashtra.
[Guest]: So it's, I don't know, about 200 odd kilometers from Pune.
[Guest]: And it's I mean, I'm obviously very fond of it, but otherwise, it's it's pretty nondescript
[Guest]: small town.
[Guest]: It has a very interesting name.
[Guest]: And it has a very interesting location.
[Guest]: Anyway, by the time I was born, my grandparents were staying there.
[Guest]: And till I was 25 years old, every single summer vacation, we used to spend in Maharashtra.
[Guest]: And of that two month period, the biggest chunk of time was in Rahimathpur, where my
[Guest]: grandparents were there, my parents, of course, my father's siblings, you know, over the years,
[Guest]: they got married, they had children, then as their families expanded.
[Guest]: So basically, it was a large extended family gathering in Rahimathpur.
[Guest]: And I, of course, adored my grandparents.
[Guest]: And I got a sense that they were special as a child.
[Guest]: But it was partly a sense that, you know, children feel for their grandparents, because
[Guest]: you always think that your parent or your grandparent is the best one in the world and
[Guest]: so on.
[Guest]: But through my years, you know, through my growing up years, I started getting glimpses
[Guest]: into how exactly how special they were.
[Guest]: And it's my lasting regret that I never actually one on one really talked to them about their
[Guest]: lives.
[Guest]: Now I'm piecing it together through things that other people have written.
[Guest]: And let me tell you, since I've mentioned about their love story.
[Guest]: So basically, my grandfather was a medical doctor, and he was active in the freedom movement.
[Guest]: And he got married and gave birth to two sons, my father and another brother, my chacha.
[Guest]: And during the third childbirth, either exactly during childbirth or shortly after, the third
[Guest]: child died and his wife died.
[Guest]: So basically, he was a widower with two young boys, two very small boys, and active medical
[Guest]: professional, but also active in the politics in the, you know, anti British political struggle
[Guest]: of the time.
[Guest]: And in one of these conventions, he met this young woman, about 14 or so years younger
[Guest]: than him, and very highly educated for, you know, remarkable for that time, city bred,
[Guest]: she was from Sangli.
[Guest]: And she was the daughter of this very well known playwright called Khadilkar.
[Guest]: It's a very, it's a very culturally very important family in Maharashtra.
[Guest]: So she was Khadilkar, she was Sindhu Khadilkar as it happened.
[Guest]: And she saw this handsome, older, slightly older man, and she fell in love.
[Guest]: And she proposed marriage to him.
[Guest]: And she said, I want to marry you.
[Guest]: So he said, absolutely not.
[Guest]: We are not a match, we are our circumstances are not matched.
[Guest]: And your parents will never agree, I will not agree because I don't I don't want to
[Guest]: put you through this situation where you take care of two children already.
[Guest]: And she said, No, absolutely, I'm not going to get married.
[Guest]: But if I get married, it will be only to you.
[Guest]: And so she persisted.
[Guest]: And then my grandfather said, Okay, the condition under which if at all we marry, which, first
[Guest]: of all, is not going to happen.
[Guest]: But if that happens, you have to tell your parents everything truthfully about my condition,
[Guest]: and that I have not asked you to marry me, you know, and she must have said yes, so I'm
[Guest]: not exactly sure what she said.
[Guest]: But basically, one day she landed up in Rehmatpur, all the way from Sangli into this small village.
[Guest]: And she being a city bred, intelligent, highly educated woman.
[Guest]: And by that time, my grandmother, my grandfather was there with his two sons, his father, who
[Guest]: by then had been paralyzed with a stroke.
[Guest]: So he lived in a completely paralyzed state for 12 years.
[Guest]: So there was a paralyzed father, there were two sons.
[Guest]: And there was a chachi, sorry, a bua, some aunt of my of my dadaji, who was a child widow.
[Guest]: And she was, you know, she lived with him basically with them and acid tongue, you know,
[Guest]: and just, you know, very cutting, but, you know, old style widow with haircut and all
[Guest]: the rest of it.
[Guest]: So that was the house.
[Guest]: And my grandmother said, I'll take it, I want this, I want you basically.
[Guest]: And they married.
[Guest]: And that must have been I think, 1940 or 42, I'm not exactly sure, maybe 42, 41 or 42.
[Guest]: And then she gave birth to three children who are, you know, my parents, stepchildren.
[Guest]: But for the longest time, I didn't know that she was my father's stepmother.
[Guest]: And because A, she was highly progressive, she never discriminated between her own born
[Guest]: children and the two earlier children.
[Guest]: She never discriminated between the grandchildren.
[Guest]: So my father was the eldest in his generation, and I'm his oldest daughter.
[Guest]: So I'm the eldest in the cousin's generation.
[Guest]: And from my grandmother's point of view, I was the oldest grandchild.
[Guest]: And so therefore the most loved, by the time the other grandchildren came along, I was
[Guest]: there.
[Guest]: And it was years later that I discovered that, oh, sagi dadi nahi ho, whatever, I mean, of
[Guest]: course, it made no sense, because I used to call her mothiyai, which means elder mother.
[Guest]: So that's how she was.
[Guest]: And they were, both of them, Anna and mothiyai, were remarkably progressive.
[Guest]: So one of the things I remember very clearly is that they had taken a position that we
[Guest]: will not attend any wedding in which dowry is exchanged.
[Guest]: And I remember once my bua's closest friend, who was almost like a bua, I used to call
[Guest]: her bua, and she was always in and out of our house in Raimadpur.
[Guest]: So she was going to get married, and obviously dowry was going to be exchanged at that wedding.
[Guest]: And for Anna and mothiyai to not go to that wedding is almost like them not going to their
[Guest]: own daughter's wedding, but they didn't go.
[Guest]: Because it was a principle stand that we have not exchanged dowry, nobody in our family
[Guest]: has exchanged dowry, and we will not go to a wedding where dowry has been exchanged.
[Guest]: And my grandmother, after she moved to this small town, in the front part of the house,
[Guest]: she established a library, the first ever library in Raimadpur.
[Guest]: She called it the Hind Vachanale, Vachanale is library, Hind is Hindustan, India.
[Guest]: And I remember it because it was in the, you know, our house was like their vada, the old
[Guest]: style vada with the central courtyard, you enter, then there is a room at the front and
[Guest]: there's a room at the top and then you enter into a courtyard, and the rest of the house
[Guest]: is basically surrounding the courtyard.
[Guest]: It's that old style, lovely house.
[Guest]: And the front, on the ground floor was my grandfather's clinic, where he would just
[Guest]: get up in the morning, have breakfast, shower, and then go there and the whole day he would
[Guest]: and just come back for lunch, again go out.
[Guest]: And on the first floor, above my grandfather's clinic was the Hind Vachanale, a library that
[Guest]: my grandmother built, I mean, assembled, not built as in not building the building, but
[Guest]: basically got books together.
[Guest]: And she would go from house to house, encouraging women and children particularly, to come there
[Guest]: and read and to borrow books.
[Guest]: And she, you know, she could cook, obviously, because all women, you know, there was no
[Guest]: choice, you had to learn to cook and housekeep, etc.
[Guest]: But she had made it very clear that cooking and housekeeping were not going to be her
[Guest]: foremost occupations.
[Guest]: So she was politically active, she was socially active, and I remember going with her to people's
[Guest]: homes and her giving this little, you know, okay, so what have you read?
[Guest]: Tell me, what did you like about that story?
[Guest]: Do you want to, it's been a long time that you've been sitting on this book, why haven't
[Guest]: you finished it, etc.
[Guest]: And because I came from a family where books were read as, you know, that was a default.
[Guest]: It was amazing for me to see this, and she was four feet, 10 inches, so very short, diminutive
[Guest]: woman with a very sweet, thin voice, getting the breakfast and all done and then just leaving
[Guest]: the house and going from house to house.
[Guest]: And that time, I remember walking very far away, you know, on the outskirts of the village,
[Guest]: and I would say, oh, this is, is this Rahimathpur still, are we still in Rahimathpur?
[Guest]: Because this is really far.
[Guest]: So she said, no, this is also Rahimathpur.
[Guest]: And we would go to this hamlet, which was very poor, you know, markedly poorer than
[Guest]: obviously where we lived and from the rest of Rahimathpur.
[Guest]: And somehow I never asked her what it was, but she would go into each home, just like
[Guest]: she used to go into other homes, and also encourage, also ask them to come to our home
[Guest]: and enter the house.
[Guest]: And, you know, and every time they came, she would give them something, you know, etc.
[Guest]: The significance of all that escaped me.
[Guest]: I had no idea.
[Guest]: I just thought that they were just poorer than some others.
[Guest]: It was only after she had passed away, and when I started working on cast, that the penny
[Guest]: dropped and I suddenly realized that what we had been going to was a Dalit basti, which
[Guest]: was on the outskirts.
[Guest]: And the act of going into their homes and the act of her inviting them into our home
[Guest]: inside the house, including in the kitchen, giving them food was a very quiet, but extremely
[Guest]: revolutionary act, the significance of which I never understood.
[Guest]: So they were much like my parents, they never preached, or they never said, Oh, look, this
[Guest]: is what we are doing.
[Guest]: And this is the right thing to do.
[Guest]: And this is what you must do, etc., none of that.
[Guest]: But how actions leave a sort of impact even, and it lasts for years after they've gone.
[Guest]: And every now and then suddenly a memory strikes me of something that she used to do or my
[Guest]: grandfather used to do.
[Guest]: And I would say, Oh, this is what they were doing, you know, but as a kid, I didn't didn't
[Guest]: know it.
[Guest]: I had no idea at that time that this is what we were doing, you know, with her.
[Amit Varma]: Such a beautiful resonance story.
[Amit Varma]: And I, you know, the line, this is also Rehmatpur, would be such a lovely title for a story or
[Amit Varma]: a book or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm also just very struck by that image of medical clinic in the ground floor, and
[Amit Varma]: then a library just above that.
[Amit Varma]: It's like you have medicine for the body and medicine for the soul, and they're both kind
[Amit Varma]: of there.
[Amit Varma]: So here's sort of I have a few related questions to, you know, justice.
[Amit Varma]: And the first of them is this, that you mentioned about how you never realized it at the time
[Amit Varma]: that the penny dropped much later.
[Amit Varma]: And one theme that I have been I have sometimes brought up on my shows as well, is do we talk
[Amit Varma]: to elder people from our family, whether it's our parents or grandparents, enough, or are
[Amit Varma]: we trapped within the bounds of whatever the relationship has been laid out as where somebody
[Amit Varma]: is, you know, like fathers and sons will typically never really talk or exchange emotional content
[Amit Varma]: or we won't really talk to our grandfathers in that way and talk about their lives and
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And I wonder if, you know, just from from the, you know, and something for the listeners
[Amit Varma]: to think about as well, that maybe there is something in doing a little bit more of that,
[Amit Varma]: and seeing them not just in terms of the role that they have in our lives, but as sort of
[Amit Varma]: individuals.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, before my father passed, I remember I sat with him and just spoke about his life
[Amit Varma]: and I recorded two, three hours of that, so it's like a small oral history that is there
[Amit Varma]: with me, which is almost like a window into another person, you know, where you don't
[Amit Varma]: see someone as your father, you just seem as an individual kind of growing up.
[Amit Varma]: And in any case, I have a fascination for these oral histories and life stories, as
[Amit Varma]: you can tell from my podcast.
[Amit Varma]: So looking back, obviously, you know, if they were still around, you would have sat and
[Amit Varma]: spoken to them or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But do you feel that is something that we should do more of, that when we go through
[Amit Varma]: life, we get circumscribed in these kinds of roles, whether they are familial relationships,
[Amit Varma]: or whether they are caste barriers, or gender barriers, or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And we think of people in terms of roles and not as, you know, three dimensional people
[Amit Varma]: with interesting, fascinating lives.
[Amit Varma]: Is that something you've thought about?
[Guest]: No, I agree with you that, of course, we should do that.
[Guest]: But I have to say one thing about just my particular, the father side of the family
[Guest]: is that the issue was never that we didn't talk.
[Guest]: In fact, the Deshpande side of the family and my mother's side, you know, sometimes
[Guest]: they make fun of this, which is that it's a bit too, it talks too much, and it's a bit
[Guest]: too democratic.
[Guest]: You know, especially with my parents and my brother and I, the four of us that that nuclear
[Guest]: family, we would constantly be arguing, discussing this, that and the other etc.
[Guest]: I guess, I have been incredibly lucky to certainly in my grandparents' generation of having such
[Guest]: incredible grandparents.
[Guest]: And I'm not just talking about my paternal grandfather, Anna and his wife, but his brothers
[Guest]: and their wives, you know, that they have all have so many aspects to their personality
[Guest]: that I'm discovering them literally now, you know, long after they're gone.
[Guest]: So for example, last year, Nayanjot Lahiri, who's my colleague at Ashoka, a well known
[Guest]: historian of ancient India, wrote this book on my Anna's brother, my grandfather's brother,
[Guest]: who also has to call Azoba, they're all Azobas.
[Guest]: Of course, you know, again, adored him, you know, was very, very close to him.
[Guest]: He was an archaeologist and he was the Director General of the Archaeological Survey of India
[Guest]: that I knew because he lived in Delhi, unlike Anna who lived in Rahimathpur.
[Guest]: So I saw this Azoba much more often because just because they were in Delhi.
[Guest]: And I knew that he was in the Archaeological Survey because often from school, if we had
[Guest]: to go to their house, you know, we would get picked up, dropped to his office.
[Guest]: I've spent many afternoons after school in the Archaeological Survey office, which is
[Guest]: to be next to the National Museum then, I don't know where it is now.
[Guest]: And I knew that he was a very sort of important archaeologist because the books on archaeology
[Guest]: in his house, he would travel a lot, people would come to see him, etc, etc.
[Guest]: And so I knew, obviously, that he had achieved a fair amount in his life.
[Guest]: And but of all the brothers, he was in some sense, he was a laddu.
[Guest]: I mean, he was the sweetest, cutest, most adorable.
[Guest]: I mean, they were all adorable.
[Guest]: But even in that adorable, a set of very adorable people, he was, I guess, the most adorable
[Guest]: of them all and very soft spoken.
[Guest]: And so one day Nainjot stopped me in the corridor and she said, are you, do you know M N Deshpande?
[Guest]: So I said, yes, he's my father's uncle, he's my grand uncle.
[Guest]: And she said, oh, so do you know his family?
[Guest]: So I said, of course, they are my chachas and, you know, my father's first, I'm very,
[Guest]: very close to them.
[Guest]: Like, they are my family in Delhi from the Deshpande side.
[Guest]: And she said, I want to write a book about him.
[Guest]: So I said, oh, how nice, etc.
[Guest]: I thought, you know, because he's a well-known archaeologist, so I wasn't surprised.
[Guest]: And then she proceeded to tell me two episodes about his life that showed him in a light
[Guest]: that I could not imagine him being.
[Guest]: So one of them was, both of them actually, were how he stood up to Mrs. Gandhi at the
[Guest]: peak of her power in India and stopped a demolition or an extension of an archaeological protected
[Guest]: site where one of them was, in fact, Birla was involved in, Birla and Mrs. Gandhi.
[Guest]: So he stood up to the collective might of Birla and Mrs. Gandhi and stopped that extension,
[Guest]: which is a story if I'd heard about Anna, I would have believed it.
[Guest]: Anna was, you know, but about Azoba was in Delhi, he was, I could not imagine him, you
[Guest]: know, taking this very strong stand and just not budging.
[Guest]: And he did it in his quiet way and he got it done.
[Guest]: And then she told me other stories, and then she wrote this book.
[Guest]: And through that book, I learned so much about him.
[Guest]: For example, from Rahimathpur, this young man went to do a BA in Ardhamagadhi.
[Guest]: I mean, how did he, so Nayan Jyot kept asking me, how did he think of this language?
[Guest]: How did he get interested in archaeology?
[Guest]: But unfortunately, anyone who could have answered that question, they're all gone.
[Guest]: So nobody knows.
[Guest]: And so through Nayan Jyot's book, through her, which is now in the public domain, I
[Guest]: learned so much about my grand uncle.
[Guest]: So in our family, the problem has not been that we haven't been close, there have been
[Guest]: the traditional barriers of authority and, you know, that prevent conversation.
[Guest]: In fact, if anything, we talk too much to each other.
[Guest]: But I guess everybody has been so remarkable in their own ways and very self effacing.
[Guest]: So there are things that they did or do, and we just don't find out, we don't know until
[Guest]: some other person and they never promoted themselves.
[Guest]: So a lot of facts are known about other archaeologists of his generation.
[Guest]: But until this book came along, nobody knew about all these things that my grand uncle
[Guest]: had done.
[Guest]: And Nayan Jyot said, it's amazing, there is no book about him, and I'm going to write
[Guest]: this book.
[Guest]: And she didn't know that I was related to him.
[Guest]: So obviously, it wasn't like she was doing it for a friend's uncle or whatever.
[Guest]: That was not the motivation.
[Guest]: But I guess so just about the Deshpande's, I think the problem is that there are too
[Guest]: many achievements, not achievements, I wouldn't say, but there are too many aspects to everybody's
[Guest]: personality.
[Guest]: And it's really hard to keep track of who's doing what.
[Guest]: And with my parents, I feel that regret every single day, that I learn about something or
[Guest]: the other about my mother or my father, and I said, Oh, gosh, I never talked to them about
[Amit Varma]: these.
[Amit Varma]: I love the way Nayan Jyot comes to you and asks you, do you know M N Deshpande, you should
[Amit Varma]: just have replied, that yes, of course, all Deshpande's are related to each other.
[Unknown]: Do you know Bappi Lahiri?
[Amit Varma]: I'm just kidding.
[Amit Varma]: And I also have a great title for an incredible web series.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm quite serious about this.
[Amit Varma]: This could be a heck of a show, The Azobaz.
[Amit Varma]: You know, like the Sopranos.
[Guest]: Like the Sopranos.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, what a series.
[Guest]: I should tell my brother, I should put this because actually, my brother has been more
[Guest]: systematic about documenting history.
[Guest]: So I think when my father's mother, she unfortunately passed away young, she was only 67.
[Guest]: So she died in 1990.
[Guest]: But my grandfather died much later.
[Guest]: And there was a time when my brother decided that, okay, now is the time that I need to
[Guest]: go with my camera to Rehmatpur and get Anna to record.
[Guest]: So he has actually done a little bit of the oral history project with some members of
[Guest]: the family.
[Guest]: So he's recorded some things with my mother, some with Anna, some with my father.
[Guest]: I guess we all have to put it together.
[Guest]: But he's been more, I guess, by the time we became adults, when we suddenly realized,
[Guest]: oh, we have these remarkable people in our family who are not just adorable and, you
[Guest]: know, just lovely, because we love them.
[Guest]: It's not just that they're more than that.
[Guest]: They've done, you know, they have significant contributions.
[Guest]: He became aware of that.
[Guest]: And he did record.
[Guest]: In fact, my father's, I reposted an essay that my father had done about Rehmatpur recently
[Guest]: on Twitter on his birthday, birth anniversary.
[Guest]: So I can share that.
[Guest]: It's a lovely, lovely essay about Rehmatpur.
[Guest]: You can post that.
[Guest]: It came out in Himal, the journal.
[Amit Varma]: I'll link that from the show notes and more power to your brother, I mean, and the idea
[Amit Varma]: is that one should not think of oral histories just in terms of extraordinary people.
[Amit Varma]: One should think of just doing oral histories in general with anybody, you know, and anybody
[Amit Varma]: can do this.
[Amit Varma]: Anybody can just sit down with somebody in their family who's kind of old or somebody
[Amit Varma]: they know and just kind of record because it's like ways of life just pass by.
[Amit Varma]: And you look in the history books and the great books of nonfiction, and you read about
[Amit Varma]: extraordinary people, but the textures of everyday life and the lives of ordinary people,
[Amit Varma]: I think are also sort of worth capturing.
[Amit Varma]: My other question that comes from that is, of course, your grandparents were outliers.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, I think it's not entirely unusual that they would be from Maharashtra.
[Amit Varma]: Like I definitely expect to be more likely that they are from Maharashtra than many other
[Amit Varma]: states.
[Amit Varma]: And part of the reason and you've also alluded to this in the past is that there is a history
[Amit Varma]: of different kinds of reform movements in Maharashtra coming right from the Bhakti movement
[Amit Varma]: and so on, where people have examined caste, people have examined gender, and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about that, because in a sense, that's also part of your heritage
[Amit Varma]: growing up.
[Amit Varma]: It is also part of the air you breathe, and I'm sure it's shaped you as well in different
[Amit Varma]: ways.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about that.
[Amit Varma]: And if you would have an idea of who the specific inspirations for your grandparents may have
[Amit Varma]: been like, obviously, the Fulets come to mind, you know, seems the most obvious sort of analogue.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, who were the kind of heroes that those people would have had back in those,
[Amit Varma]: you know, pre-independence days or early days?
[Guest]: I think for my, I maybe I don't know, honestly, that's the short answer.
[Guest]: But the long answer is probably Gandhiji for my grandparents, because I think they were
[Guest]: extremely inspired by Gandhi and the nationalist movement.
[Guest]: They were a part of this larger Congress, you know, coalition, but they were socialists.
[Guest]: So all my, in fact, all the three Asobhas and their wives were socialists, and in fact,
[Guest]: there was this sort of a political cultural organization called Rashtra Seva Dal, which
[Guest]: all my bhuvas were members of.
[Guest]: And it was a, they would dance and they would do plays and things like that.
[Guest]: So there's always been music and dance and acting in the Deshpande soil of my family.
[Guest]: And my father actually broke away from all that when he left Rahimathpur and when he
[Guest]: came to, went to Baroda first, and then came to Delhi through his, you know, pursuing his
[Guest]: higher education.
[Guest]: And he got introduced to Marx I, and he delved deeper into A Phule, etc, you know, that part
[Guest]: of the Maharashtrian heritage, and the Santa Kavita, the whole bhakti literature.
[Guest]: So he was quite an expert, by the way, on that, even though that was not his profession.
[Guest]: And one of his sisters was also a very well-known actor.
[Guest]: So my father had written this commentary on piecing together the Santa Kavita, the Abhangas
[Guest]: that are very progressive, very radical, take a very anti-caste, gender egalitarian view.
[Guest]: And my aunt has produced that.
[Guest]: So it's a lovely program.
[Guest]: And if it's anywhere online, I'll send you the link for that of Santa Kavita.
[Guest]: And so in my father's house, I've seen these volumes, and my father was a Sanskritist,
[Guest]: he knew Sanskrit fluently.
[Guest]: So he read all the texts in the original Sanskrit or Marathi, whichever the language was, but
[Guest]: he was very, very influenced by the bhakti poetry.
[Guest]: So I think the influence of bhakti, Phule's thought, etc, is more in my father.
[Guest]: And in fact, he ended up writing this play called Satya Shodhak, which turned out to
[Guest]: be a hit for many reasons, I'll tell you later.
[Guest]: So my introduction to Phule, etc, came through my father.
[Guest]: But through my grandparents, all the Azobas and the Ajjis, it was mainly Gandhi.
[Guest]: And then later on, you know, JP, Lohia, etc, that stage.
[Guest]: And my father's first play, my father was, apart from being a professor in JNU, he was
[Guest]: also a playwright.
[Guest]: My father's first play, Udvasta Dharmashala, I guess is one of his most, the most well-known
[Guest]: play.
[Guest]: He shows a young professor, and this was written in 1973, so it predates the emergency.
[Guest]: People think it's about the emergency, but it's not.
[Guest]: And it's a young professor who's being interrogated by the university committee for making, you
[Guest]: know, communist or whatever, it's like a McCarthy-ish scenario being adapted to the Indian situation.
[Guest]: And the young professor is a young Marxist, and his father's passed away in the play,
[Guest]: and the uncles are socialists.
[Guest]: So when the professor goes back to, you know, for the funeral or collect books or something,
[Guest]: the uncles throw him out saying, oh, you opposed your father, you never went down the socialist
[Guest]: path and you took this other path, etc.
[Guest]: So people read echoes of some autobiographical thing, but my grandfather and my father never
[Guest]: quarreled and there was never, in that sense, a disagreement.
[Guest]: They were always on the best of terms.
[Guest]: So that's, those are my father's influences.
[Guest]: But I want to just touch to the point that you made earlier about how people are heroes
[Guest]: in their ordinary lives.
[Guest]: And I want to talk a little bit about my mother's mother.
[Guest]: So my mother came from not an extraordinarily radical or progressive family, just a regular
[Guest]: middle class family, and when she was eight years old, her father and her eldest brother,
[Guest]: the two earning members of the family, died within six months of each other.
[Guest]: And her own mother was not very well educated, she had education only up to class three.
[Guest]: So all of a sudden, there was this young widow who was 40 years old, with four small children,
[Guest]: youngest being eight years old, that was my mother, no source of income.
[Guest]: So it was a calamity, and of course, relatives stepped in and friends stepped in, etc.
[Guest]: But my grandmother was remarkable.
[Guest]: And she said that I'm not going to bring up my children under terms and conditions set
[Guest]: by others.
[Guest]: You know, I want to be independent, I want my children to be independent.
[Guest]: And she was very skilled at pretty much everything she did.
[Guest]: So she was very skilled at, you know, sewing, like she was a good seamstress, but she had
[Guest]: never taken tailoring classes or anything like that, you know, she just learned.
[Guest]: So she took tailoring classes, took a loan, took tailoring classes, and then started stitching
[Guest]: clothes for a living.
[Guest]: And my oldest aunt enrolled in nursing college, and there she was to be given three saris
[Guest]: as uniforms.
[Guest]: She kept two, and she would send one sari back to her mother.
[Guest]: And my grandmother would cut that sari up and make frocks for my mother and the other
[Guest]: sister.
[Guest]: I mean, that's how they survived.
[Guest]: And it's a heroic tale.
[Guest]: And again, I knew it kind of at the background, but as I grew older, and my dad, my mother's
[Guest]: mother, I always saw her in white, you know, she was always dressed in white, and she was
[Guest]: a beautiful woman, but she never wore a bindi, she never wore any colored clothes, etc.
[Guest]: And I knew that she did, nobody asked her to do it, but that's just how she was.
[Guest]: And I remember one long conversation with her in Bombay before she passed away, and
[Guest]: she told me the story of her life and how difficult it was to be a widow at 40.
[Guest]: And you know, how she stood by her principles, and she brought up her children the way she
[Guest]: wanted.
[Guest]: I mean, of course, it was very hard.
[Guest]: She had to make a few compromises, the children had to, you know, it was not easy at all.
[Guest]: But to the best of her ability, she raised her children.
[Guest]: So that's another story of a very heroic life.
[Guest]: But you know, in a sort of more in an everyday context, but how people can be heroes, you
[Guest]: know, in an everyday context.
[Guest]: So that's, that's the other side.
[Guest]: And that I think, I've seen in my mother, I've seen in her sisters, you know, very strong,
[Guest]: you know, iron willed women would give anybody a run for their money.
[Guest]: And they, you know, that's, that's how they were, but they were not, you know, they were
[Guest]: not sort of leftists or anything like that, you know, that that was not there.
[Guest]: My mother eventually became, but not my aunts.
[Guest]: But they were remarkable, you know, just regardless of whatever ideology they followed.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, now I'm thinking that they could be like, you know, if Netflix does Aajobas,
[Amit Varma]: Hotstar could do Aajis.
[Amit Varma]: So two competing shows, and I think I'd actually watch Aajis more, you know, and you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: that your grandparents were in the Rashtriya Seva Dal, and I'm thinking had they been in
[Amit Varma]: something called the Lok Seva Dal, then you could have proudly said that all my grandparents
[Amit Varma]: were on LSD.
[Amit Varma]: But leaving that, you know, getting that out of the way, tell me more about your mom, for
[Amit Varma]: example, because, you know, she was an activist, she was involved in the women's movement.
[Amit Varma]: You've spoken about how she won every battle in her life, except her last.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about her and what was your relationship with her and so on.
[Guest]: So she became an activist, people remember her as an activist, but actually, that is
[Guest]: just the last phase of her life.
[Guest]: And I have always said, although, I mean, I've said it to him, I don't know, but I always
[Guest]: like to say that she had much more to her personality than the period of activism that
[Guest]: that defined, I would say, I don't know, she died when she was 72.
[Guest]: So maybe the last 20-25 years that defined her, which is a long enough period.
[Guest]: And it's really amazing when you think about her age, when she got into this all this activism.
[Guest]: So that's the other remarkable thing.
[Guest]: But she was this very strong-willed, rebellious young woman.
[Guest]: And my grandma, that Ajji has told me stories about growing up, how strong-willed and she
[Guest]: was, when I was growing up, she and I clashed a lot because she was perfect in every way.
[Guest]: And her point was, why can't you be that way?
[Guest]: You know, and my point was, no, you are perfect, I'm not.
[Guest]: And just let's agree to disagree on that question.
[Guest]: No matter how mothers are, you know, so her point is, well, you can do one, two, three,
[Guest]: but why can't you do four, five, six?
[Guest]: And I'd say, well, you do one, two, three, four, five, six, I'm happy doing one, two,
[Guest]: three, let me be.
[Guest]: So we would clash a lot.
[Guest]: And you know, as you probably realize, between my parents and us, they always had this very
[Guest]: open atmosphere of, you can say anything to us, and we will say, but it was all very civil.
[Guest]: And it was never preachy, it was they never talked down to us.
[Guest]: So we could question them, just as they would tell us to do things, and they had to justify
[Guest]: every single instruction that they gave us.
[Guest]: So it wasn't like, do this, because I'm telling you to do it, do it, because these are the
[Guest]: benefits of doing it, and so on.
[Guest]: So my mother was a tough, toughie.
[Guest]: She was really, really tough.
[Guest]: And she was very disciplined herself.
[Guest]: So she would expect that discipline from other people.
[Guest]: And as a child growing up, that's never, you know, one always clashes with parents when
[Guest]: you're asked to clean your room or whatever, whatever.
[Guest]: So but she was remarkable.
[Guest]: I mean, so she married this man, theirs was also a love marriage.
[Guest]: So I mean, for me, when I hear the term love marriage, it's very odd, because most marriages
[Guest]: in my family, starting with my grandparents, have been love marriage.
[Guest]: So very few have been arranged.
[Guest]: So in our family, when there's an arranged marriage, we say, oh, that's an arranged match.
[Guest]: You know, it's unusual.
[Guest]: A step into the unknown, a bold step.
[Guest]: Or somebody is not, some woman is not working, as in not every, all women work all the time.
[Guest]: Obviously, I know that, and you know that, but by working, I mean, not working for pay
[Guest]: or not going outside the house.
[Guest]: When somebody doesn't do that, it becomes unusual.
[Guest]: Oh, she's, she's not doing anything else, because every woman in my family does a million
[Guest]: things.
[Guest]: And so my mother went to Baroda for her undergrad, because those days, Baroda was of course,
[Guest]: MSU was very good.
[Guest]: And in Maharashtra, it was quite common for young people to go to Baroda, and my father
[Guest]: was also there, but they didn't meet, I mean, they kind of met, but not really met kind
[Guest]: of a thing.
[Guest]: That was not, that was not where their love story started.
[Guest]: And then she joined the Home Guards.
[Guest]: And so she learned to ride a truck, she learned to ride a fire engine.
[Guest]: She's rescued people from, you know, that crane that goes up to the top floor of a building
[Guest]: and rescues children from a building on fire.
[Guest]: She's done that.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: She could ride a horse.
[Guest]: She was a fabulous swimmer.
[Guest]: And she could cook and clean and keep house and stitch and knit, and I don't know what
[Amit Varma]: else.
[Guest]: Yaar yeh Forrest Gump wali story ho gayi.
[Guest]: Matlab, you know, and she would say, you know, I'm going to teach you stitching.
[Guest]: I said, No, I'm never going to touch a needle and a thread.
[Guest]: She said, but I can do that.
[Guest]: And I can do this.
[Guest]: I said, you do that and this and whatever else you want to do.
[Guest]: I'm just going to do two, three things.
[Guest]: So anyway, so she was in the Home Guards and she got posted to Delhi as a part of a Home
[Guest]: Guards.
[Guest]: She was a working woman.
[Guest]: And her uncle, who was a widower, was in the government at that time.
[Guest]: So he was a part of the early bureaucrats, you know, post-independence.
[Guest]: And they had a house on Wellesley Road, which is now called Zakir Hussain Marg.
[Guest]: And he was a widower.
[Guest]: His son was studying somewhere.
[Guest]: Anyway, so he used to live alone.
[Guest]: So she used to just live there because it was just convenient to be there.
[Guest]: And my father had come to Delhi for his MA.
[Guest]: And that's how they met through a common friend, etc.
[Guest]: So they met and they fell in love.
[Guest]: And then my father went to Hong Kong because he was a China specialist.
[Guest]: He was, you know, his bread and butter job was a professor of China studies in JNU.
[Guest]: So at that time, mainland China was not open for foreign researchers.
[Guest]: So they went to Hong Kong.
[Guest]: And I was almost born in Hong Kong because I was going to be born.
[Guest]: And then my mother's family put pressure, no, first child, first child, you must always
[Guest]: come back to the mother's house, etc, etc.
[Guest]: My mother was, I think, quite happy to give birth to me there.
[Guest]: So she came back and then I was born, then my brother was born, etc.
[Guest]: And then JNU didn't exist as an institution then.
[Guest]: So in 1970, JNU got established.
[Guest]: And there was a School of International Studies, which was an independent organization that
[Guest]: got co-opted into JNU, lock, stock and barrel.
[Guest]: And everybody who was in SIS went to JNU, so did my father.
[Guest]: And we moved to JNU campus, I don't know if you've had an occasion to see it, which was
[Guest]: at that time completely the outskirts of the city.
[Guest]: So everything that you see around the JNU campus now didn't exist.
[Guest]: There was no bus service, there was no cars, nobody had a car.
[Guest]: And there were 36 families living in this 1000 acre forest area, completely disconnected
[Guest]: from anywhere else.
[Guest]: There were just two JNU buses that connected to the city once in the morning, once in the
[Guest]: evening bus.
[Guest]: So it was like living on an island in some sort.
[Guest]: And then my mother realized it was going to be very difficult for her to manage doing
[Guest]: a job and children and you know, living in that remote place, etc.
[Guest]: So she stopped working outside for a living, but she did many other things.
[Guest]: She learned Braille and started translating books in children's books in Braille for blind
[Guest]: children.
[Guest]: So she used to work on a voluntary basis with the blind school, which is near Oberoi Hotel
[Guest]: here in Delhi.
[Guest]: So then she learned macrame and I don't know any skill that she didn't have.
[Guest]: She learned that while we were growing up and she was in JNU.
[Guest]: And then she declared one day that she was going to enroll for this five year BAMA course
[Guest]: learning French.
[Guest]: She told us and my father, we used to have this sort of family.
[Guest]: So the rule was everybody must have dinner together, always.
[Guest]: And there was no TV in the house.
[Guest]: So you know, we had to talk to each other.
[Guest]: And there was this All India Radio used to play a national program of classical music
[Guest]: that used to be playing on the background.
[Guest]: And we would have dinner and all these conversations and all the fights and everything used to
[Guest]: take place over dinner.
[Guest]: And she declared that she was going to join French.
[Guest]: And so we said, aren't you very old and to a child, the parents are always very old.
[Guest]: So she said, I don't care.
[Guest]: And she was like that.
[Guest]: She didn't care.
[Guest]: And she joined this integrated BAMA program.
[Guest]: So JNU has these five year integrated language programs.
[Guest]: So you join after school and you do three years of, if you do three years, you get a
[Guest]: BA degree.
[Guest]: If you do full five years, you get an integrated BAMA degree.
[Guest]: And because she didn't know French, she joined the first year and her classmates were obviously
[Guest]: stayed out of school.
[Guest]: And she was this mother of two children, you know, we were not teenagers yet, but I wasn't
[Guest]: a teenager yet.
[Guest]: Still, I mean, you know, I must have been 11 or 12, whatever I was.
[Guest]: And so the classmates were much younger than her, but she was not self-conscious at all.
[Guest]: And she did this five year French course, you know, and in between my father got a fellowship
[Guest]: to go to Germany.
[Guest]: So we all, family, Boria Bistra, all of us, we went off to Germany and we went to school
[Guest]: there and my mother had broken her, but she learned German there.
[Guest]: So she was quite a linguist, you know, apart from Gujarati.
[Guest]: Marathi, Hindi and English that she already knew.
[Guest]: She was fluent in French and she picked up German when we were there.
[Guest]: And even my father was quite, was quite a linguist.
[Guest]: So they were both, you know, so anyway, we spent time in Germany and we came back.
[Guest]: She finished her French masters and then she started doing live translations, you know,
[Guest]: interpretations rather.
[Guest]: So when your heads of state come and there's this voice that comes through that, she was
[Guest]: one of those voices.
[Guest]: And as a part of that, in the 1982 NAM summit, when Fidel Castro had come to India and Indira
[Guest]: Gandhi was the prime minister, she got a job there as an interpreter for the French team.
[Guest]: And while she was inside Vigyan Bhavan, because it was all very highly security controlled
[Guest]: and all that, she found out that Mrs. Gandhi was going to be a press conference, which
[Guest]: was only allowed for members with a press card.
[Guest]: And obviously she didn't have a press card, but I don't know how she faked her way and
[Guest]: she entered that hall and she asked Mrs. Gandhi a very uncomfortable question, which at the
[Guest]: moment I can't remember.
[Guest]: It was something to do with something that Mrs. Gandhi had done, you know, some authoritarian
[Guest]: move, till people found out that she was not a journalist.
[Guest]: But in that large Vigyan Bhavan hall, so she was a gutsy woman like I haven't seen, you
[Guest]: know.
[Guest]: So this is all her pre-activist phase, by the way.
[Guest]: So her pre-activist, and of course she was, you know, she taught us swimming, she was
[Guest]: cycling, swimming, everything, she used to drive the car.
[Guest]: I mean, we didn't have a car then, but eventually when we got a car, she was the driver.
[Guest]: And in fact, in the ration card, Parivar Ka Mukhiya was my mother, my father said, okay,
[Guest]: you just, you know, and my father was a perfect antidote to her in that sense.
[Guest]: He was the most laid back, just sitting in a chair, drawing circles in the air kind of
[Guest]: a guy.
[Guest]: And she was the doer and the mover and the shaker and so very remarkable personalities,
[Guest]: but very opposed to each other.
[Guest]: But you know, both with tremendous influence in their own ways.
[Guest]: But when I see parents of today, young people who, you know, with small children, or our
[Guest]: students who were kids, whatever, 15 years ago, 16 years ago, there's one thing I realized
[Guest]: is that our parents never shielded us from anything.
[Guest]: It was never the case that don't read this book, or don't watch this movie, or nobody
[Guest]: should say anything that will hurt my child.
[Guest]: You know, nowadays, when I see parents, it's a very controlled environment that their children
[Guest]: are in.
[Guest]: And so when they come to university, when they hear things that they've never heard
[Guest]: before, like some very, you know, obscurantist or regressive view or something like that,
[Guest]: they almost explode because their parents have protected them so much and our parents
[Guest]: have never protected us.
[Guest]: They never told us, you know, believe in religion or don't believe, eat this or don't eat this,
[Guest]: listen to this music or don't listen to that music.
[Guest]: The only thing they told us is that you make your choices and you're responsible for the
[Guest]: consequences.
[Guest]: So if it's bad, it's bad.
[Guest]: I mean, if the consequence is bad, you have to learn to deal with it, because you made
[Guest]: that choice.
[Guest]: You know, so my brother and I, we can't blame other people because we have always been told
[Guest]: that whatever is happening to you, maybe other people played a role sometime, but at the
[Guest]: end of the day, it's your life, you have to sort it out, you know, just get up and get
[Guest]: on with it kind of a thing.
[Guest]: So very tough in that way, in a way that I'm not as a parent, because I feel like they
[Guest]: were, I guess, a little too tough, you know, just throw children at the deep end of the
[Guest]: pool and let them swim kind of a thing.
[Guest]: So I tend to be a little more protective towards my daughter, or I used to be, now she's an
[Guest]: adult in her own right.
[Guest]: But it taught us things, taught us to be independent, taught us to realize that, you know, at the
[Guest]: end of the day, it's your life.
[Guest]: If it's going well, it's great.
[Guest]: If it's not, then you need to figure out how to fix it, you know.
[Amit Varma]: So those are lessons.
[Amit Varma]: So inspiring.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, my parents also had a love marriage, but my mother did not do most of these things
[Unknown]: that you mentioned.
[Amit Varma]: Is there a, I'm just thinking of this whole, you know, this press conferencing of her breaking
[Amit Varma]: in and asking a question to Indira Gandhi.
[Amit Varma]: Was it captured on camera?
[Guest]: Is there a YouTube clip of it?
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: So there were lots of things from that time that should be somewhere.
[Guest]: So for example, another, you know, anecdote from my childhood is because my father was
[Guest]: a playwright.
[Guest]: I mean, he became a playwright eventually, but, you know, back in 72, 73, he was in JNU.
[Guest]: I mean, JNU had just gotten established, so he was in SIS and so therefore in JNU.
[Guest]: But writing, he had started to work on a play, but he was obviously must have been inclined
[Guest]: towards that field.
[Guest]: And so he had a lot of friends in the artistic world.
[Guest]: And so when we were really small children, all the names that today we think of as big
[Guest]: names in the artistic circuit for us, they were so and so maushi, so and so kaka, so
[Guest]: and so, you know, kaku and so on.
[Guest]: So for example, Sai Paranspe was Sai Maushi.
[Guest]: And those days we used to live in Lajpat Nagar 4 because JNU campus hadn't been built.
[Guest]: And Sai Paranspe used to live in Lajpat Nagar 2, which was across the ring road.
[Guest]: And there were two of us and Sai Maushi also had two children and her daughter is also
[Guest]: Ashwini and so am I.
[Guest]: So that Ashwini started to be called Vini because to distinguish between the two Ashwinis.
[Guest]: And she used to be married to Arun Joglekar at that time.
[Guest]: So Arun kaka, Sai Maushi and Vini and Gautam was their son.
[Guest]: They were in and then there were us, there was us.
[Guest]: And so we were in each other's like the children were in each other's homes all the time.
[Guest]: And Sai Paranspe was in the Doordarshan at that time.
[Guest]: I don't know exactly what position she held, but she definitely was in charge of the children's
[Guest]: programming.
[Guest]: But Chokha Karekram used to come in the evening, so she was in charge of that.
[Guest]: And Vini and I were used as the default, like default performance as it were.
[Guest]: So whenever she, she kept shooting us, you know, walking to the market, playing, playing
[Guest]: with dolls, doing this, doing that, etc. etc.
[Guest]: She would just say ki acha chalo abhi shooting hai, abhi yahan se wahan tak bijao.
[Guest]: And then I remember, in fact, one thing that I very vividly remember is she had done this
[Guest]: film with my parents and me going to the zoo.
[Guest]: And apparently I was a very well behaved child.
[Guest]: That's what people say.
[Guest]: But she wanted to film a badly behaved child.
[Guest]: And so she taught me about how to create a tantrum, throw a tantrum when we went to some
[Guest]: particular cage.
[Guest]: So we had to rehearse that.
[Guest]: And it was tough because I didn't behave like that as a child at that time.
[Guest]: But she taught me, etc.
[Guest]: And then I remember doing many takes, my parents walking with me up to that cage.
[Guest]: And then I'm like, oh, I want ice cream or whatever it was I was asked to do.
[Guest]: And so all those films, I don't know where they are.
[Unknown]: Somebody has got to find them and put them on YouTube.
[Amit Varma]: This is the renowned economist Ashwini Deshpande throwing a tantrum at a cage.
[Guest]: In fact, I met Sai Paranth many years ago, you know, as an adult.
[Guest]: And I asked her, I said, what happened to all those films that you made with Winnie
[Guest]: and me?
[Guest]: And she said, yeah, I know how we lose.
[Guest]: I mean, she also didn't know where those films were.
[Amit Varma]: Fabulous.
[Amit Varma]: And earlier you mentioned your mom driving and reminds me of something that happened
[Amit Varma]: in the early 90s when Thelma and Louise was going to be released in Saudi Arabia.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, women were at that time banned from driving there.
[Amit Varma]: I believe that law has just been lifted.
[Amit Varma]: So when films would come, they would cut all scenes of women driving, which is why Thelma
[Amit Varma]: and Louise ended up at four minutes.
[Amit Varma]: This might well be apocryphal.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me now, what were you like as a kid growing up?
[Amit Varma]: Like you've given me a really nice sense of the environment at home, where you have these
[Amit Varma]: independent people around you who are not talking down to you or preaching or being
[Amit Varma]: paternalistic.
[Amit Varma]: You can, you know, talk to them as equals, you can do all of that.
[Amit Varma]: At the same time, there are these other strands, like in the sense, I'm guessing that there
[Amit Varma]: must be a respect for scholarship and academia because of, you know, who your dad was and
[Amit Varma]: what he did, and also your mom learning all these things.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, you know, and in every typical Maharashtrian household, perhaps,
[Amit Varma]: but yours, there must also be this respect for the arts and learning and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And in this case, you know, both your parents were sort of creators in different ways.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about that environment in which you grew up and how that shaped you
[Amit Varma]: and what were you like as a kid?
[Guest]: So in terms of the artistic connection, it was a very strong one.
[Guest]: I mean, my father eventually became a playwright, but he must was already starting to work on
[Guest]: his plays.
[Guest]: His sister, my bua, one of my buas, was at that time a student at the National School
[Amit Varma]: of Drama.
[Guest]: I don't get Sulbha Deshpande?
[Amit Varma]: No, Jyoti Deshpande.
[Amit Varma]: Jyoti Deshpande.
[Amit Varma]: She's now called Jyoti Subhash.
[Guest]: That's a married, married, and her daughter, in fact, is now making waves, Amruta Subhash,
[Amit Varma]: who was...
[Amit Varma]: Oh, I've heard of her.
[Guest]: So Amruta is my cousin.
[Unknown]: Wow.
[Guest]: So Amruta's mother, Jyoti, who at that time was Jyoti Deshpande, was a student at NSD.
[Guest]: And she was the classmate of Nasir and Om.
[Guest]: And they were best buddies.
[Guest]: So they would always...
[Guest]: And that's the other thing.
[Guest]: I mean, they would always come to our house because they were in the hostel.
[Guest]: They were tired of hostel food.
[Guest]: And they would call my father, bhai sahab and bhabhi.
[Guest]: And so they would go in, bhai sahab, bhabhi, bhook lagi hai.
[Guest]: And my mother would always dish out, you know, there's some amazing food for them, etc.
[Guest]: And of course, at that time, they were not at all well known.
[Guest]: And Om Puri, both of them had faces that were not traditionally suited to what a Hindi film
[Guest]: hero should look like.
[Amit Varma]: So did you ever think ki yeh kaise actor banenge?
[Guest]: No, I had seen them in plays.
[Guest]: Because that was the other thing, because my abua was used to act.
[Guest]: So Ibrahim Alkazi was the director of NSD at that time.
[Guest]: And so Rohini Hattangadi, I think was one bad senior, Jaidev Hattangadi was one bad
[Guest]: senior, there was Manohar Singh, there was Sai Paranspe.
[Guest]: So all these theatre people, and my father, by the way, also was a very good actor.
[Guest]: So in fact, Sai Paranspe did this remarkably funny play called Ek Tamasha Achcha Khasa,
[Guest]: in which she took the Tamasha form, and made a political satire about the state of the
[Guest]: country at that time.
[Guest]: And my father played the Bhondu Maharaja in that.
[Guest]: She played the Maharani, Sai Paranspe played the Maharani.
[Guest]: And Arun Joglakar was the cunning Mantri, who's basically running the show.
[Guest]: And it was hilarious.
[Guest]: And so there was a time when I remember the dialogue.
[Guest]: When Ghashiram Kotwal was being done in Marathi in Maharashtra, and Rajendra Nath produced
[Guest]: it in Hindi in Delhi.
[Guest]: And my father was one of the Brahmins, you know, I don't know if you've seen Ghashiram
[Guest]: Kotwal, but the wall of Brahmins that's at the back, so he was one of those.
[Guest]: So we as kids, and my mother and Jyoti, my aunt, because all the women had to wear nine
[Guest]: yard sarees, so they were part of production, you know, doing the costumes and everything.
[Guest]: And so, unbelievable number of afternoons after school was spent in this Ghashiram rehearsal,
[Guest]: you know, in the green room.
[Guest]: And even the other kids in school used to say, you know, don't your parents, aren't
[Guest]: they worried about homework and things like that?
[Guest]: I said, pata nahi, I mean, we just get picked up and we are taken to the rehearsal because
[Guest]: both my parents were then, there was no, we were not rich enough to have nannies or babysitters
[Guest]: or maids or anything like that.
[Guest]: So we went wherever our parents went.
[Guest]: And so it was this bordering on bohemian kind of a childhood with all these, you know, theatre
[Guest]: walas.
[Guest]: And then, of course, my father's play started, then Dr. Lagu acted in it, Sriram Lagu acted
[Guest]: in the Marathi production.
[Guest]: So then Dr. Lagu, his family, and then, you know, various Amol Palikar, etc, etc, just
[Guest]: people who later on we realized were, you know, just this very, very creative people.
[Guest]: And my mother also was a very good actor.
[Guest]: So she had used to act in college plays and all, but through my father, she also got an
[Guest]: avenue for acting.
[Guest]: And even on her side, you know, there are, they are not, they didn't make, nobody made
[Guest]: a career, but her, my cousins and all her nieces, they are, you know, they've acted
[Guest]: in school, college plays and, or society plays and things like that.
[Guest]: So there is that creative streak there.
[Guest]: But my father's side is the sort of most pronounced.
[Guest]: So my father is a playwright, my bua Jyoti is an incredibly gifted actor, you should
[Guest]: watch some of her work if you can.
[Guest]: For personal reasons, then she quit acting and she went to Maharashtra and she married
[Guest]: her, the man that she was, she was, she had decided to marry, that was Subhash, her husband.
[Guest]: And so then she, Jyoti, Amrita is her, is her daughter.
[Guest]: So and, but even my other buas who didn't make a career of the arts, they are incredibly
[Guest]: artistically gifted.
[Guest]: They can all sing, they can all dance.
[Guest]: And they are now in their 70s, but if they start dancing, you should see, oh man, they
[Guest]: can, they can give the youngsters a run for their money.
[Guest]: So there's a very, very strong artistic environment.
[Guest]: Jyoti, my aunt, is a very good singer.
[Guest]: Amrita is a fantastic singer.
[Guest]: My grandmother, that's Moti, the Rahimatpur grandmother, she could sing really well.
[Guest]: So yeah, there's a very, very strong artistic sort of influence.
[Guest]: I guess I'm the outlier in that sense.
[Guest]: I mean, I have not done anything in the field of the arts, in a way that many members of
[Guest]: my family have.
[Amit Varma]: This was true until last week, when my tweet with you singing got some 84,000 retweets
[Amit Varma]: or whatever it is, and perhaps this is, you know, a late start to a well-deserved artistic
[Amit Varma]: career.
[Amit Varma]: No, I linked to the tweet, you can see the 84,000 retweets.
[Amit Varma]: So Twitter keeps bringing these numbers down, I don't know why.
[Amit Varma]: But clearly, you were also drawn to films and music and singing and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So how was that?
[Amit Varma]: And I'm also fascinated by another side of your father that you have mentioned elsewhere,
[Amit Varma]: but we haven't touched upon yet here.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll ask you to touch upon that is how he was deeply into cinema.
[Amit Varma]: And according to him, there were four kinds of cinema.
[Guest]: So I really want to know more about this.
[Guest]: So he was a really chilled out guy, as they say today.
[Guest]: I mean, literally, it's possible that you enter a room and you don't notice that he's
[Guest]: sitting there.
[Guest]: And you think that he's doing nothing.
[Guest]: But actually, he's thinking about the piece that he's going to write.
[Guest]: And bombs could explode in his vicinity, but he would just sit sitting in his chair.
[Guest]: Sometimes he would say, Baba, what are you doing?
[Guest]: Do something, you know, I've said that to him often.
[Guest]: And so he would laugh and say, yeah, you know, and all of us, including me are so hyper,
[Guest]: oh, I need my room and I need my study and I'm shutting the door and don't come in and
[Guest]: da da da.
[Guest]: And he would just literally like the way I'm sitting now, you can see you do this.
[Guest]: And then he would start making circles in the air.
[Guest]: And then he would do then he would get up, walk a little bit and he would have some imaginary
[Guest]: argument with somebody and then come back.
[Guest]: And then suddenly he would get up, find a surface, it could be a table, it could be
[Guest]: anything.
[Guest]: Take a piece of paper and write literally without crossing a single word.
[Guest]: I don't know, 1500, 2000 words at a stretch, beautiful, clean, elegant writing.
[Guest]: So all this while that we thought he was just doing nothing randomly, he was formulating
[Guest]: his argument.
[Guest]: But it was crystal clear.
[Guest]: And you know, his writing is in the public domain, so you can read it for the absolutely
[Guest]: brilliant clarity that that his mind possessed.
[Guest]: What was your question?
[Guest]: I got carried away talking about my father.
[Amit Varma]: No, I'm very happy to, you know, you can go in any direction you want.
[Guest]: But I'd asked you about the four different kinds of cinema and his love for movies.
[Guest]: So yeah, so that's what it was.
[Guest]: So he, when we were growing up, Hindi cinema was not something that educated families watched.
[Guest]: This is post liberalization phenomenon where now everybody can, you know, watches Bollywood
[Guest]: and whatever.
[Guest]: Our time, most of the people that we knew were not allowed to watch Hindi cinema.
[Guest]: The only things films ever allowed was Guddi or Jagriti or, you know, with good message,
[Guest]: you know, Desh Bhakti Ka or Bhai Ke Pyar Ka or things like that.
[Guest]: Certainly no sexy songs or anything like that.
[Guest]: And but he would watch because he would say that popular cinema is the pulse of the people.
[Guest]: This is what people are thinking.
[Guest]: And the way Hindi cinema understands the pulse of the people, no other medium can.
[Guest]: And so, for example, when Jai Santoshi Ma became a runway hit, he wanted to see it.
[Guest]: And at that time, the rest of the family drew a line saying, not Jai Santoshi Ma, please,
[Guest]: we are not watching.
[Guest]: And he said, no, Ashwini, I think we have to watch Jai Santoshi Ma.
[Guest]: So he and I, because we had heard stories of people going with thalis and doing puja
[Guest]: to the screen.
[Guest]: I mean, it was a cult movie, you know, of its time.
[Guest]: And he said, we don't have to participate in that in that sentiment, but we need to
[Guest]: understand what that sentiment is about.
[Guest]: You know, so till his dying day, literally, he would wanted to watch movies in the theater,
[Guest]: not on the TV, because he said, when you see audience interacting with the movie, then
[Guest]: you realize the magic that it was having.
[Guest]: And one of the last films I saw with him was English Vinglish in the theater in Pune.
[Guest]: And it was, I said, oh, should I get a, you know, DVD, should we watch it?
[Guest]: And he said, no, no, no, let's go to the theater.
[Guest]: So we went.
[Guest]: And that was Sridevi's comeback film, as you know.
[Guest]: And when she first enters, when you first see her on the screen, you see her back.
[Guest]: And then she turns around.
[Guest]: And the audience went into raptures, I mean, the kind of whistles and the clapping that
[Guest]: you saw, I saw then, I had only seen in Amitabh Bachchan movie and Shah Rukh Khan.
[Guest]: And so then Baba said, see, would you have been able to see this if you had watched this
[Guest]: movie at home?
[Guest]: This is the influence that Sridevi has.
[Guest]: This is why she's the India's first and only female superstar, etc, etc.
[Guest]: So his point was that there is nothing called a good film or a bad film.
[Guest]: Films are either entertain, make you, you know, make you enjoy them.
[Guest]: So for him, enjoyment was the key.
[Guest]: And so he classified films into four categories.
[Guest]: He said the good, good films, which are like the Rays and the, you know, the masterpieces,
[Guest]: world cinema type, you know.
[Guest]: Then there are the good, bad films.
[Guest]: So these are commercial potboilers, Dun Dinon Ke Liye Main, Manmohan Desai, Sholay would
[Guest]: be the best, I guess, good, bad film ever in India.
[Guest]: And then there are the bad, good films, which he hated, which is the films with the message,
[Guest]: arty films, you know, where there's no dialogue for 15 minutes.
[Guest]: It's this, you know, this one flower, you keep focusing on that and nothing is happening.
[Guest]: And his point is, you know, I spent two hours in the theatre, what did I get out of it?
[Guest]: What did I learn out of this?
[Guest]: You know, you can't bore your audience out of the theatres.
[Guest]: So that's what he called, or the preachy ones, you know, message about, you know, secularism
[Guest]: or something, some progressive thought, but just boring at the end of the day.
[Guest]: So those were, in his view, the bad, good films.
[Guest]: And then there were the bad, bad, the C grade, B grade type, which are just bad, I mean,
[Guest]: in every possible way.
[Guest]: So he said, you must always watch the good, good.
[Guest]: And you must always watch the good, bad.
[Guest]: And you obviously will never know in advance what is what.
[Guest]: So you could end up being, it could be a bad, bad, but that's a risk you have to take.
[Guest]: So watch all films, how will you know otherwise, what it is?
[Guest]: And I remember, and those days were not days of multiplex, so there were four shows, 12-3,
[Guest]: 3-6, 6-9, 9-12.
[Guest]: And because we used to live in JNU, it was very far and our school was Sardar Patel,
[Guest]: which was very far.
[Guest]: So 9-12 at night was the only show which was possible for us, given that we didn't have
[Guest]: a car.
[Guest]: We live very far away from, you know, movie theatres, etc.
[Guest]: And there was this Priya movie theatre, which was about a 20 to 30 minute walk from our
[Guest]: house.
[Guest]: So a very common routine in the Deshpande JNU household was have an early dinner and
[Guest]: walk, go to Priya, there was a Nirula's parlor, buy ice cream, then go to and watch 9-12,
[Guest]: come back home at 12-30 or whatever.
[Guest]: But there was no escape from school the next day.
[Guest]: So it could not ever be excused that if I watch a 9-12 movie tomorrow, I won't go to
[Guest]: school today.
[Guest]: That was not the thing.
[Guest]: So my parents would say, are you willing to get up tomorrow and go to school?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: And then I remember once going to school and telling my classmates, you know, we saw Kurbani
[Guest]: last night at 9-12.
[Guest]: Kurbani is of course, Zeenat Aman with her very explicit and just very sensuous portrayal.
[Guest]: And my friends said, who did you go with?
[Guest]: Didn't your parents object?
[Guest]: I said, we went with our parents.
[Guest]: You know, but they were never ones for shielding us.
[Guest]: You know, their point is, you make up your minds about how you're going to view these
[Guest]: things and how you're going to process the information that you get.
[Guest]: You must have the ability to separate the good from the bad, the influences you want
[Guest]: to imbibe.
[Guest]: And often my father, you know, people would say, you know, how do you allow your children
[Guest]: to watch all this?
[Guest]: And so his point is, well, I'm hoping that they will grow up to be sensible, but supposing
[Guest]: they don't grow up to be sensible, then that's what it is.
[Guest]: And that will happen even if I suppress, you know, they will find ways of supposing they
[Guest]: turn out to be bigoted or just, you know, have very views that I don't agree with.
[Guest]: But that might happen anyway.
[Guest]: So by stopping them from reading this book or watching this movie, et cetera, I'm not
[Guest]: gaining, I mean, I'm not preventing that thing from happening.
[Guest]: Whereas this way, you know, and it was the same for everything, for, you know, alcohol,
[Guest]: because he knew that there would come a time when we would grow up and we would taste alcohol.
[Guest]: I mean, that's, it's never the case that that's never going to happen, right?
[Guest]: So how do you deal with that transition, you know?
[Guest]: So they were very down to earth in that, in that manner.
[Guest]: So there was very, I mean, not that we shared every single, you know, gory detail from our
[Guest]: lives with them, obviously not because they were parents, but there were no fundamental
[Guest]: secrets between us and them.
[Guest]: I mean, not because they'll judge us, no.
[Guest]: I mean, it's not cool to tell your parents everything.
[Guest]: So that way we didn't tell them everything, but there was no fear that, Oh my God, if
[Guest]: I tell this to Baba or I, they'll say, Oh my God, how did you do this?
[Guest]: Or you drank a glass of wine?
[Guest]: How could you, et cetera?
[Guest]: You know, there was never such, there was no fear like that, girlfriends, boyfriends,
[Guest]: their point was, you know, all your friends are welcome, whether you're romantically involved
[Guest]: or not openly.
[Amit Varma]: So lovely.
[Amit Varma]: And I love the distinction of good, good films, good, bad films, bad, good films, and bad,
[Amit Varma]: bad films.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, they can sometimes be a confusion between good, bad and bad, bad.
[Unknown]: I mean, what is bad?
[Amit Varma]: Bad?
[Amit Varma]: Like I recorded an episode a couple of days back.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know when it will release in relation to your, this one, but with Jai Arjun Singh
[Amit Varma]: and Subrat Mohanty and Subrat gave this delightful story about how he arrived at the motto for
[Amit Varma]: his life.
[Amit Varma]: And he told me about how he watched a B Subhash film once, Babbar Subhash, and it's a film
[Unknown]: called Dance Dance.
[Amit Varma]: So basically in it, there are these two dancers, they go to Amrish Puri, Amrish Puri spots
[Amit Varma]: them somewhere gets a fancy for the woman and invites a couple home and basically murders
[Amit Varma]: them and their children, who later later grow up to be Mithun Chakravorty and Smita Patil.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, so apparently at one point, these children still played by child actors before
[Amit Varma]: they grow up to be whoever are at a beach and the boy is really starving and he's like,
[Amit Varma]: and she puts his head on his lap and they don't have food to eat and this is Juhu Beach.
[Amit Varma]: And she starts singing to him, something to that effect, I'll link the song from the show
[Amit Varma]: notes.
[Amit Varma]: And then eventually one guy comes and like he's a halwa wala, but there is and I've never
[Amit Varma]: seen a halwa wala on Juhu Beach, of course.
[Amit Varma]: But the twist is that to get the halwa, he has to dance, there is something like that.
[Amit Varma]: So this little girl tells a little boy this immortal line, ki zindagi mein ek baat yaad
[Amit Varma]: rakhna, ki agar halwa khana hai toh naachno parega, dance, dance, which Shubhrat adopted
[Amit Varma]: as a motto for his life and to me represents this profound human truth.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm thinking I haven't even seen Dance Dance, but I have made up my mind ki boss,
[Guest]: this is a good bad film.
[Guest]: And so you know, I may have mentioned this earlier to you, like for example, Govinda,
[Amit Varma]: I love him.
[Amit Varma]: I love Govinda.
[Guest]: Oh my goodness.
[Guest]: And then, you know, especially his later output, the first one, you know, Raja Bhaiya and all
[Guest]: thoda bahut, there were issues with that, but the later ones with all these number ones,
[Guest]: you know, and when he teams up with David Dhawan, David Dhawan and Qadar Khan, Qadar
[Guest]: Khan and Nargis aur uske bete ka naam kya hai?
[Amit Varma]: Monish Bell.
[Guest]: Nahi, nahi.
[Guest]: Nargis aur uske bete ka naam kya hai?
[Guest]: Nargis ke bete ka naam.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, Nargis and Sanjay Dutt, Sanjay Dutt.
[Guest]: So Sanjay Dutt, hero number one, jodi number one, hero number one mein Sanjay Dutt nahi
[Guest]: hai shaad.
[Guest]: I mean, ek aur ek gyaara.
[Guest]: I mean, ek aur ek gyaara, I know every single joke, but I can watch it endless number of
[Guest]: times and laugh at the same time.
[Guest]: So that's what my father used to say that, look, and he also used to watch and used to
[Guest]: say, how do you, how is it that we laugh so much?
[Guest]: Because just because it's just the situational humor and Govinda is a master at that.
[Guest]: So you are not, you have to appreciate in terms of the genre that they represent.
[Guest]: So he used to always say that, for example, when we go to see Spider-Man or Star Wars,
[Guest]: do we really think it's a realistic representation of human life?
[Guest]: Obviously not.
[Guest]: But you suspend disbelief when you go into a Spider-Man movie and you watch it and analyze
[Guest]: it in terms of its, on its own terms.
[Guest]: And he used to get very annoyed by Indian intellectuals who would happily go to a Star
[Guest]: Wars or a Spider-Man movie, but would make fun of Hindi movies to say they're not realistic.
[Guest]: He said, hai bhaiya, wahan toh jaa ke dekhte ho, tumhukon wo Oscar bhi mil jaate hain.
[Guest]: That also you applaud.
[Guest]: Toh wahan kaunsa realism hai, right?
[Guest]: And so the point is that, his point was that analyze every art production in terms of its
[Guest]: own genre, rather than comparing it to a genre, which, which, which is wrong, which is the
[Guest]: wrong thing to do.
[Guest]: You know?
[Guest]: So like, for example, his own play, Udhvastu Dharamshala, it's a political play and it's
[Guest]: one of the first political plays in India.
[Guest]: That's why it's considered so important.
[Guest]: It's a very wordy, difficult, not difficult, but it's, it's heavy, you know, it, you, it
[Guest]: shakes you up.
[Guest]: It, you, you have to absorb it.
[Guest]: Now, his point is that if you compare my play to, you know, these potboilers that you see
[Guest]: in Maharashtra theater every evening, where ha ha ha, laugh a minute, you know, double
[Guest]: meaning jokes, etc.
[Guest]: He said, you can't compare the two.
[Unknown]: I'm not going for that audience also.
[Guest]: So if you're analyzing, you can dislike Udhvastu Dharamshala, that's, that's fine.
[Guest]: But then dislike it on its own terms.
[Guest]: I mean, say why it's not good in terms of what it's claiming to be, right?
[Guest]: And so he had the very healthy respect or a healthy disrespect, whichever way you look
[Guest]: at it, for everything.
[Guest]: And he, and it extended to food, it extended to everything.
[Guest]: So his point is try everything.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a category error I've committed in my childhood, perhaps my pre-adult years
[Amit Varma]: where in my mind, something was really cool and something was not cool, though I'm pleased
[Amit Varma]: to report that by the time I hit my 20s, I just started loving Govinda as well.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I was just going with the flow and so on, incredible, or private private, I have
[Amit Varma]: appropriated that song to my own purposes, as it were.
[Amit Varma]: And I think even, you know, somebody like Baba Saigal is incredibly underrated.
[Amit Varma]: He's almost like the Govinda of indie pop in terms of, you know, Dil Ki Gaddi, Pyaar
[Amit Varma]: Da Junction, Dabba Khaali Re.
[Amit Varma]: It's like mind blowing.
[Amit Varma]: Even the little things he does today on YouTube extremely underrated, because we have this
[Amit Varma]: hierarchy of art in our heads.
[Amit Varma]: And I always tell my writing students that never be ashamed of reading anything.
[Amit Varma]: Anything you read has done something good to capture your attention.
[Amit Varma]: And there are lessons to be learned and you don't never feel ashamed of reading a book.
[Amit Varma]: So on that note, and on that lesson from your father, which I find so profound that you
[Amit Varma]: have to engage with popular art, not just respecting it and seeing it on its own terms,
[Amit Varma]: but also understanding that it's a reflection of society.
[Amit Varma]: And what I find when I talk to many people on the show who have a similar background
[Amit Varma]: to us is that we, of course, have elite privileged backgrounds, right?
[Amit Varma]: And the danger is that we grow up, as I certainly did, in these little bubbles.
[Amit Varma]: And you think the bubble is a world, right?
[Amit Varma]: And outside you have views from windows of exotic things and things happening outside.
[Amit Varma]: But you think the bubble is a world and you don't really engage adequately.
[Amit Varma]: We are extremely lucky to be located in the place we are because there is such richness
[Amit Varma]: and diversity of languages and cultures and food and all of those things.
[Amit Varma]: But we are content in our bubbles.
[Amit Varma]: And it can take a long time, I think, till all the different layers of blindness that
[Amit Varma]: you have peel off one by one.
[Amit Varma]: And I think one great way of getting outside that bubble and engaging with the world outside
[Amit Varma]: is through popular culture, like your dad said, is through, you know, sitting in the
[Amit Varma]: stalls when Sridevi turns around and everybody goes nuts.
[Amit Varma]: Or people throwing coins at the screen when Rashnikant comes or whatever, so on and so
[Amit Varma]: forth.
[Amit Varma]: So how much, like, were you ever, like, in hindsight, looking back, do you ever feel
[Amit Varma]: that there was that element of that bubble?
[Amit Varma]: Or do you feel that you were fortunate in a way to engage outside that bubble because
[Amit Varma]: your parents encouraged you to do so and so on and so forth?
[Amit Varma]: And if you are to look at the journey of your life, do you, you know, can you identify things
[Amit Varma]: that were perhaps unseen to you at 15, which at 35, you saw very clearly, not just in the
[Amit Varma]: personal anecdote domain of, you know, your grandmother going to, you know, a place which
[Amit Varma]: is also Rehmatpur, but, you know, in general?
[Guest]: So the answer to the bubble question is actually yes and no.
[Guest]: So in addition to the influences from within the family, which were multiple and of multiple
[Guest]: kinds, and I mean, family and friends of my father's of, he lived in this very eclectic,
[Guest]: just, you know, quite a remarkable circle of acquaintances.
[Guest]: We growing up on the JNU campus that time was a bubble of a different kind.
[Guest]: So inside the bubble, there was an amazing amount of freedom and intermingling and intermixing
[Guest]: of a kind that you don't see today's middle class children, I mean, those who are at the
[Guest]: same, in the same class background as us.
[Guest]: So there were 36 families, as I mentioned, there were three hostels and the JNU had acquired
[Guest]: this land of 1000 acres, the rest of it was this jungle.
[Guest]: And these third, because there was no transportation, there was, you know, I think one or two people
[Guest]: had cars entirely on the campus, you know, one or two people had television sets and
[Guest]: so on.
[Guest]: And so the whole inhabited part of the campus was our home, extended home.
[Guest]: So my, the door to our house, for example, my parents' house was never locked.
[Guest]: Because it was just, kaun aayega, yahi toh log hai saare.
[Guest]: And you know, Wednesday evenings and Sunday evenings were Chitrahar, so you had one professor
[Guest]: who had a TV, had no escape because these, all of us, the gaggle of school kids would
[Guest]: just descend on his house ki hum toh dekhenge.
[Guest]: And isme there were, you know, people from different parts of the country, there were
[Guest]: Hindus, there were Muslims, there was a Parsi family, and Christians, of course, caste diversity
[Guest]: itni nahi thi, baad mein jaake thodi baad, but not much really.
[Guest]: But there was, there was diversity along many different dimensions.
[Guest]: And it never, it was very natural for us to go to Zia and Asad's house for Eid, and them
[Guest]: coming to our house for Ganesh Chaturthi, it was, it was just not even, you couldn't
[Guest]: even think that there was an issue about that.
[Guest]: It was just two festivals, the Indians, so it in a very, it was a bubble.
[Guest]: Now I realize that life outside was not like that at all.
[Guest]: But it was the best bubble to be living in, you know, but it's not the same kind of bubble
[Guest]: that today's middle class children have, which is very constricted by caste, class, you know,
[Guest]: whatever linguistic group that you belong to, you know, religion, so you just meet literally
[Guest]: people just like your type.
[Guest]: So we actually interacted with a larger variety within the class background, because if you
[Guest]: had a professor in JNU, that already just sort of puts you in a bracket.
[Guest]: But within that band, that band itself was diverse along many other dimensions.
[Guest]: And we got these influences without thinking about it.
[Guest]: So I'll give you an example, for example, in those political views, you know, everybody
[Guest]: thinks of JNU as this lefty, lefty place, but there was Professor ML Sondhi, who was
[Guest]: in the Jan Sangh.
[Guest]: In fact, he was the only MP, I think, of the Jan Sangh at that time.
[Guest]: His children used to go to the same school as us.
[Guest]: They were friends, Shivaji and Vivekanand.
[Guest]: Mrs. Sondhi was, you know, Professor Sondhi, I don't remember very well, but Mrs. Sondhi,
[Guest]: I still meet, so I remember her very well.
[Guest]: She's into classical music.
[Guest]: So we often meet at concerts and all that.
[Guest]: Never once did my father say, don't play with the children of the Sondhis because he's RSS
[Guest]: Jan Sangh.
[Guest]: Never did once the Sondhis say, don't play with GPD's children because they are, you
[Guest]: know, this socialist lefty, whatever, anti-RSS, anti, you know, they have different worldviews.
[Guest]: Never.
[Guest]: It was never an issue, you know.
[Guest]: So the parents of the children that we grew up with, they had different political ideologies,
[Guest]: had different orientations, but that never was an issue.
[Guest]: Not just with my, not with my parents, with no parents.
[Guest]: So there was this remarkable freedom to interact with each other.
[Guest]: So only when you grow up later on, you know, then you realize that, oh, so-and-so was this,
[Guest]: so-and-so was that, but that was never an issue.
[Guest]: Whereas today, I can't imagine, you know, children of two families belonging to such
[Guest]: diverse political opinions, children being friends and being allowed to, you know, be
[Guest]: in and out of each other's homes.
[Guest]: But it's a legacy of that time.
[Guest]: So even now when I meet Mrs. Sondhi, it's almost like, you know, she's motherly towards
[Guest]: me because she's seen me, I'm the same age as her children, and it's lovely, you know.
[Guest]: But that's the legacy of JNU of that time.
[Guest]: I mean, I always say that I have three mothers, you know, and now I have one, two of them,
[Guest]: my own mother and the second mother also passed away recently.
[Guest]: But all these three women, one was my biological mother, but the other two women were almost
[Guest]: like mothers to me on the campus, and they really were like mothers, you know.
[Guest]: But collectively, the three gave me a motherhood, which was possible only, and all three are
[Guest]: very different from each other.
[Guest]: But that collective motherhood or the collective fatherhood that I enjoyed certainly was special.
[Guest]: So yes, it was a bubble, but not the kind of bubble that we see, not the kind of bubble
[Guest]: that we see.
[Guest]: I realized it was a bubble because when I moved out to the real world, when I left JNU,
[Guest]: I said, oh, the real world looks like this.
[Guest]: People are so categorized into backgrounds and you know, who will talk to whom, who do
[Guest]: you interact with, etc, etc.
[Guest]: In the JNU of that time, this was not an issue.
[Amit Varma]: So to go back to the earlier question, tell me more about yourself growing up in this
[Amit Varma]: period, in the sense you're surrounded by these influences, this kind of environment.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me about the importance of music in your life.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you mentioned how, you know, one of the things that you and Mrs. Sondhi
[Amit Varma]: shared in common was classical music.
[Amit Varma]: You have written many, many pieces on music, which I will link from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: You have gotten into a famous defense of Lata Mangeshkarji, which somehow became a part
[Amit Varma]: of an academic debate, which we will also talk about later.
[Amit Varma]: But just going back to the young Ashwini, you know, what kind of role did music play
[Amit Varma]: in your life?
[Amit Varma]: And from there, what was sort of your conception of yourself?
[Amit Varma]: Because if you're an artistic kid, like you're into music, you've written about both Malik
[Amit Varma]: Arjun Mansoor, and you've read Ashok Da Ranade, you've written about Lata and Asha and so
[Amit Varma]: on.
[Amit Varma]: You're into all these different kinds of music, both in a sense of experiencing them and thinking
[Amit Varma]: about them and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And your father being a playwright and all of that, and you being a pretty mean writer
[Amit Varma]: yourself, if in the context of what you've studied, one would imagine that you would
[Amit Varma]: have been drawn towards being an artist also being a creator also like that.
[Amit Varma]: So how did you sort of, what role did these play in your life?
[Amit Varma]: And how did you evolve in the directions that you did?
[Guest]: So music has always been a very important part of my life.
[Guest]: It's a pity that I didn't pursue, now it's one of my biggest regrets about my life.
[Guest]: I don't have too many, but this is definitely one, which is that I should have pursued music
[Guest]: more seriously.
[Guest]: My parents were tone deaf, they couldn't sing to save their lives, but they were very much
[Guest]: into music.
[Guest]: So the music was always playing in the house.
[Guest]: And my aunts are amazing singers, so they would sing, so there was always music.
[Guest]: And my mother tried very hard to get me to learn.
[Guest]: And I did learn in fits and starts, but just as she was rebellious, I was rebellious too.
[Guest]: So every time she would put me in, get me to start on music, I would find some excuse
[Guest]: to leave it because the discipline of it, the discipline that it required, I didn't
[Guest]: have that, I guess.
[Guest]: I've also learned the sitar, by the way, I learned the sitar for four years.
[Guest]: But again, that just when it, when, you know, the thing is that with any art form, initially
[Guest]: it's a lot of fun.
[Guest]: Then comes a point where it starts to become difficult, actually, as you become more comfortable
[Guest]: with it.
[Guest]: That's when it gets more difficult.
[Guest]: Because as long as you're not very comfortable, it's like you just learn a few things, etc.
[Guest]: And at that transition point, you have to commit to regularly practice.
[Guest]: And I've given up so many things just at that transition point, because I just found excuses.
[Guest]: I mean, in my head, they were always very valid excuses, but now I recognize them for
[Guest]: what they were basically just excuses saying, I don't have the time for this.
[Guest]: And every time I gave up, and I gave up many times, my mother would, and I would have this
[Guest]: huge argument.
[Guest]: And she would say, you're wasting a talent, and all of this, and you'll regret it one
[Guest]: day.
[Guest]: And I said, Okay, I'll regret it when I regret it.
[Guest]: I'm not regretting it now, etc, etc.
[Guest]: And of course, I regret it now.
[Guest]: So I should have learned music systematically, and developed, not to perform, not that way,
[Guest]: but just developed a musical ability, which unfortunately, I don't have.
[Guest]: And I regret that for sure.
[Guest]: But having said that music gives me so much joy that actually, I've resumed learning,
[Guest]: but it's more just for me to, you know, just for me to enjoy, there's no competition, there's
[Guest]: no performance, there's nothing, it's just something I really enjoy.
[Guest]: And the thing is that when I was growing up, the only thing I ever wanted to be was a medical
[Guest]: doctor.
[Guest]: I was not into social sciences.
[Guest]: I didn't read any nonfiction.
[Guest]: I read either fiction, or my school books, you know, and I had no other career choice
[Guest]: other than being a medical doctor.
[Guest]: That's it.
[Guest]: So, so my point was also what's the point of learning and spending so much time on music,
[Guest]: because eventually, when I become a doctor, I'm not going to have time to pursue and then
[Guest]: my father would say no, but Dr. Lagu, see, he's a medical doctor, but he's an actor.
[Guest]: And Maharashtra, in fact, has a lot of qualified medical doctors who are very, you know, in
[Guest]: fact, has a tradition of medical doctors in theatre.
[Guest]: And also, my namesake, Ashwini Viredesh Pandey, is a scientist and she has a PhD.
[Guest]: So and they would say that no, you could still be a medical doctor and still, you know, excel
[Guest]: at music.
[Guest]: And I, it's just one of these foolish things you do as a child.
[Guest]: But you know, everybody has to learn, make their own mistakes and no point in my telling
[Guest]: other people that, oh, because I made this mistake, you should not because everybody
[Guest]: has to make, sometimes we make the same mistake through generations and but yeah, that so
[Guest]: music has been very important is writing on music was completely serendipity.
[Guest]: I still don't think that I'm an expert on anything, but I've just enjoyed writing these
[Guest]: pieces a lot.
[Guest]: And it's just more my enjoyment that shows through in the pieces, rather than any scholarly
[Guest]: erudition.
[Guest]: I don't claim any erudition at all in these in these matters.
[Guest]: But now in my old age, I have actually realized the virtue of being consistent with music.
[Guest]: And I, you know, I travel a lot and you know, there are long gaps, etc.
[Guest]: But to the best of my ability, I learn a little bit here and there and you know, so I'm trying
[Guest]: to develop it as a, if not very regular, but at least as a consistent passion.
[Guest]: And that's what it will remain.
[Amit Varma]: Ashwini ji, I have to take strong exception to your using the phrase now in my old age.
[Amit Varma]: You are the same age as Shah Rukh Khan.
[Guest]: He would never use language like that.
[Guest]: He would not.
[Amit Varma]: And also you have berated me at least three, four times in the past because I called you
[Amit Varma]: Ashwini ji and because I called you ma'am and you said ki yeh sab mat use karo.
[Amit Varma]: So to hear you say words like this is like I am now deeply disillusioned and this cognitive
[Guest]: dissonance is happening.
[Guest]: Not at all disillusioned.
[Amit Varma]: And I have to say that I, I really want to see you write more about music because I loved
[Amit Varma]: some of your writing on it.
[Amit Varma]: I want to read out this first part of your piece on Malik Arjun Mansoor, where you write
[Amit Varma]: quote Malik Arjun Mansoor is a man who resides in music.
[Amit Varma]: His postal address is Mithun J Bangalodharwar, but he actually inhabits a world of music.
[Amit Varma]: In the morning, he lives in Todi Asawari, afternoons are spent in the shadows of Sarang.
[Amit Varma]: He sits under the canopy of Puriya Marwa in the evening and he spends the nights in the
[Amit Varma]: palaces of Yaman Bhoop Bageshri.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Guest]: It's so beautiful.
[Guest]: But these are not my words.
[Amit Varma]: This is, this is my translation.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, I'm so sorry.
[Amit Varma]: I didn't realize this.
[Amit Varma]: This is Pula Deshpande.
[Guest]: Yeah, but which in the original Marathi is beautiful.
[Guest]: And so the challenge was for me, I, this was a challenging piece for me because Pula Deshpande
[Guest]: in those who know, who've read him in Marathi know how he's a master at words, you know,
[Guest]: and to convey that impression in any other language is hard.
[Guest]: So this piece, actually, I spent time and even though these are not my words in Marathi,
[Guest]: but to how do I say it in English that it conveys exactly the same feeling that Pula
[Guest]: did in the Marathi was challenging.
[Amit Varma]: So I will take a little bit of the compliment, 10% of the compliment.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, I loved all your writing on music, so many pieces that I read, you were kind
[Amit Varma]: enough to send me those links and, and I linked them all from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: So do admit this now appears to be a bit of a faux pas, but these are lovely lines anyway.
[Amit Varma]: And often the act of translation is just an act of recreation, in a sense, you capture
[Amit Varma]: the essence of what somebody said, recreate it.
[Amit Varma]: It's not a word by word translation.
[Amit Varma]: It's not a word by word by word never works across.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And so in fact, after I did this, I was so because Pula is such an icon in Maharashtra.
[Guest]: I was really afraid and Malik Mansoorji is another one.
[Guest]: And so after I've translated it, I sent the English one to my father and I said, don't
[Guest]: read the Marathi, read the English and tell me whether it sounds like Pula writing in
[Guest]: English.
[Guest]: And he read it.
[Unknown]: And he said, yes, it does.
[Unknown]: So I said, beautiful.
[Guest]: Then I sent him the Marathi.
[Guest]: I said, now you read the Marathi.
[Guest]: So then he said, you've done a good job.
[Guest]: So I was so happy, because it wasn't, you know, you can't translate Pula word by word.
[Guest]: It's impossible.
[Amit Varma]: So there's a Malik Arjun Mansoor story from one of my previous episodes, episode 250 was
[Amit Varma]: done with a good friend of mine called Naren Shenoy.
[Amit Varma]: So Naren is very much into Malik Arjun Mansoor.
[Amit Varma]: And he told the story of how when he was sort of that one day, you know, back in the early
[Amit Varma]: days of the internet, he was googling something for about Malik Arjun Mansoor and finding
[Amit Varma]: some music of his and you know how when you kind of Google something back in those days,
[Amit Varma]: a pop up would come and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So basically, he did some research on Malik Arjun Mansoor.
[Amit Varma]: And then he went downstairs with his wife for dinner, and then she comes up to the room
[Amit Varma]: and goes to the computer.
[Amit Varma]: And there is a pop up which is saying, browse naked pictures of Malik Arjun Mansoor.
[Unknown]: Tells you something about algorithms of those times.
[Amit Varma]: So I have a tangential question.
[Amit Varma]: And here I'm kind of thinking aloud about the process of the arts of learning the arts.
[Amit Varma]: And you spoke about how when you start learning music, it's a lot of fun till you reach that
[Amit Varma]: stage where there is a tremendous amount of discipline.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm actually speculating that once you're past that, and you get to a certain level
[Amit Varma]: of mastery, the fun begins again and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So is it a little bit like a U-shaped, you've mentioned U-shaped curves in other contexts
[Amit Varma]: of employment and education, and we'll come to that later.
[Amit Varma]: But is this also do you think a U-shaped curve of a sort that in the beginning of your education,
[Amit Varma]: when you know very little, it's a lot of fun, the middle part is really tough, but to make
[Amit Varma]: it fun again, you have to put in the yards.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, I wouldn't know about the U-shape because I never got to the other side, but
[Guest]: I can imagine that it's a U-shape.
[Guest]: But what I will say to you know, that if there is even an iota of some kind of a natural
[Guest]: talent, like, you know, people sing in tune, or they can draw or they can write or anything
[Guest]: else which need not be your career, but I think it's tremendous to have that as a part
[Guest]: of your life, which always stays with you.
[Guest]: And I haven't given too many lessons to my daughter, but this is the one lesson I always
[Guest]: tell her that you must have something which you can pursue without being dependent on
[Guest]: anyone else.
[Guest]: And that way, you will always have something that you look forward to, always, always,
[Guest]: you know, and music for me has been that thing, which, no matter what else is happening, and
[Guest]: you know, life goes through ups and downs, as it does for everyone.
[Guest]: But the music has been this one constant source.
[Guest]: And this whole thing about music therapy, etc, I'd learned later that there is a thing
[Guest]: called music therapy.
[Guest]: But because I had music as a companion always in different ways, it ended up playing that
[Guest]: role in, you know, when through different episodes in my life, but it's really very
[Guest]: important.
[Guest]: So I feel that if anyone has any talent in any dimension, I'm not saying I have talent,
[Guest]: but I'm just saying that even if there's an iota of talent, one should sort of hang on
[Guest]: to it and develop it in some way.
[Guest]: Not thinking of making a career because that can also lead to disappointments.
[Guest]: But sort of keep working at it, keep it as a second wheel that runs your life.
[Amit Varma]: And I love that caveat of yours, not thinking of making it a career, because I think too
[Amit Varma]: often we are socialized to think of the things we do in instrumental terms.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, if something doesn't appear to be instrumental, it seems like a waste.
[Amit Varma]: But I would just say that there have to be things that you do just for their own sake,
[Guest]: you know, absolutely.
[Guest]: Just for their own sake and just for your own sake, and especially for women, I mean,
[Guest]: you know, this is one of the things that I think women I mean, I'm now digressing a little
[Guest]: bit into my research areas, but women are always ridden with guilt when they take time
[Guest]: to do something which is exclusively for themselves, you know, and everybody's socialized that
[Guest]: way.
[Guest]: So the guilt might be very high, it might be very low.
[Guest]: And sometimes you there are women, I realized, will never get to do it because of the pressures.
[Guest]: I've been fortunate always to have not had that those kinds of pressures.
[Guest]: But you know, once a week, my music class is just time, but just for me, you know, and
[Guest]: I think I'm really fortunate to be able to carve out that time, but I think it's such
[Guest]: an important time and it's such an important activity for just to keep your sanity, to
[Guest]: get perspective on life to sort of calm down and say, okay, you know, it's life is going
[Guest]: on.
[Guest]: Otherwise, the rest of it is all you know, you know, there's some deadline, something
[Guest]: is happening, some race here, something, you know, one is constantly, and these days the
[Guest]: distractions have increased, I think I'm constantly distracted between phone is pinging, bell
[Guest]: is ringing, you know, email is coming, something or the other, in the middle of that, you know,
[Guest]: time sort of stops, so I think it's nice to sort of rein life back in.
[Guest]: And I'm not just saying music could be, it could be painting, it could be writing, it
[Guest]: could be a sport, it could be anything that we might be good at, you know.
[Guest]: And I think we should definitely, all women, but all people, I think.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but it's a great point that is so much harder for women, because you're expected
[Amit Varma]: to always look after the men in your life and look after the house.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, you almost feel guilty if you if you have like all pleasures, in a sense,
[Unknown]: can can be guilty pleasures.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a danger for women, certainly sparked by something you just mentioned.
[Amit Varma]: Here's another question.
[Amit Varma]: You spoke about all the distractions around you and how it's important for you to carve
[Amit Varma]: out that me time, and I think of how, when we were growing up, we didn't have so many
[Amit Varma]: distractions, smartphones, TV, but it's not like there's a lot on TV, there's one channel,
[Amit Varma]: we, you know, some of us fortunate enough to have books around, but you're not going
[Amit Varma]: to be reading all the time, that there was a lot of enforced me time, that there was
[Amit Varma]: a potential to develop a certain kind of introspection to develop a certain kind of life.
[Amit Varma]: And today, the rhythm of life is so choppy.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, we are always looking at our smartphones.
[Amit Varma]: And even there, it is not as if we are consuming content in a slow, deliberate way.
[Amit Varma]: But it's, you know, you're either scrolling up or swiping left to right.
[Amit Varma]: And just the rhythm of life, and therefore, perhaps the rhythm of how we think is choppy,
[Amit Varma]: choppy, choppy, choppy all the time.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you know, you have taught people from the generation before this, to this generation,
[Amit Varma]: you've been a mother yourself, and of course, you've been a kid yourself, because otherwise
[Amit Varma]: you wouldn't be here.
[Amit Varma]: So, so, you know, is this something that you think makes a difference, not just in an old
[Amit Varma]: people lamenting about, you know, these life these days has become like this, young people
[Amit Varma]: are like this.
[Amit Varma]: But do you think that this changing of the texture of life, you know, can shape a person
[Amit Varma]: in a different way, and therefore, it's incumbent upon all of us, even people of our age, who
[Amit Varma]: are like, I am certainly, you know, fighting distractions and failing so often, that even
[Amit Varma]: for us, that we need to take that step back, think about what, you know, the rhythms and
[Amit Varma]: textures of our life are, and think about what we need to do differently.
[Amit Varma]: So what are what are your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: No, no, absolutely.
[Guest]: And again, it's not a question of nostalgia, I think in many ways, the young people today
[Guest]: are smarter, they are able to assimilate information, they are very clear about their boundaries,
[Guest]: they are very articulate about what they want and what they don't want.
[Guest]: I think as children, we ended up doing a lot of things that we didn't particularly care
[Guest]: about, but only because one just had to do it, there was no choice.
[Guest]: So when I see my daughter's daughter, for example, being, you know, assertive in terms
[Guest]: of what she'll do, what she won't, her articulation, you know, I mean, that level of articulation
[Guest]: I still don't forget about when I was her age.
[Guest]: So in many ways, that's, that's amazing.
[Guest]: And that's, that's, that's really good.
[Guest]: But the distraction part of it is very serious.
[Guest]: For example, I have switched off notifications for Twitter, Facebook, everything.
[Guest]: So now I check it only when I check it.
[Guest]: And people get really upset saying, oh, but I tweeted and I gave, sent you a direct message,
[Guest]: you didn't see it.
[Guest]: I said, well, I didn't, because that's a step that I've taken.
[Guest]: In my family, we try to enforce this to the extent possible, no devices on the, at the
[Guest]: dining table.
[Guest]: That doesn't always happen.
[Guest]: Sometimes, you know, somebody is expecting a call or something, the phone is always there.
[Guest]: The one thing that I have to say during the pandemic, I gave up, is watching dinner without
[Guest]: a screen.
[Guest]: Earlier, we used to eat at the dining table.
[Guest]: Once the pandemic came, we would just pick up our plates, sit in, because we have TV
[Guest]: in only one room, because we've decided to, that's the TV room.
[Guest]: So that the act of watching TV is a deliberate act where you have to get up and move to a
[Guest]: room.
[Guest]: So no other room has any television.
[Guest]: And that's something that we've decided as a policy to do.
[Guest]: Of course, we can always watch on our phones or whatever, but we most, we don't do that
[Guest]: so much.
[Guest]: But in the, during when the pandemic started, we said, okay, no, we are going to watch,
[Guest]: you know, it's just, we were sitting at the home the whole day.
[Guest]: So evenings, it was just easier to pick up your plate, serve yourself and go into the
[Guest]: TV room and watch from there.
[Guest]: And I have to say, we, we've got used to that now.
[Guest]: It's now dinner time, we are watching Netflix or whatever, you know, OTT something.
[Guest]: And I have to say the content is so good.
[Guest]: It is so good.
[Guest]: And because I don't watch anything during the day, I have now justified it by saying
[Guest]: that, look, I mean, this is my only time to watch OTT.
[Guest]: So I watch at night.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, one, that's just, I guess one, one changes with age, but the kind of
[Guest]: free time, unfocused time that we had as children is not going to come back at all, ever.
[Guest]: And obviously, as a person, at a personal level, I feel that's unfortunate, but I'm
[Guest]: sure that there are many good things that, that children today are doing that we didn't
[Guest]: do as children.
[Guest]: So I'm not going to characterize it in black and white, but I do keep talking to my daughter
[Guest]: about the need to disengage from the screen and how much she listens to me or whatever
[Guest]: that I don't know, but I do keep saying it.
[Amit Varma]: And does she look at you while you're saying it or she's looking into a phone?
[Guest]: No, that's a rule.
[Guest]: So if I see her looking at the phone, I stop talking and I say, I'm not going to talk to
[Guest]: you.
[Guest]: She, she's good.
[Guest]: She realizes now that, so she can't bring her laptop to the dining table, for example,
[Guest]: not allowed.
[Guest]: So once in a while, when she goes to send an email, she asks me, can I just please bring
[Guest]: it for five minutes?
[Guest]: I need to send this email very urgently.
[Guest]: And she has to send it and then she has to send it back.
[Guest]: So often I say, okay, then finish your email and then come because I don't want to see
[Guest]: the laptop at the dining table.
[Guest]: So the, I mean, these, these things are not black and white.
[Guest]: It's not so strict, but at least these are small attempts that, that one makes.
[Guest]: I mean, I go to restaurants and you go to this fancy restaurant, paying through your
[Guest]: nose and families are just on their phones the entire time.
[Guest]: And I feel like, why did you come here?
[Guest]: And not in India, of course it's bad, but in Europe, you should see it's in the US,
[Guest]: it's a million times more, I mean, it's very rare to find somebody at a bus stop or at
[Guest]: the train station, just staring into space.
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned earlier, you spoke about, you know, being in a bubble, but being fortunate
[Amit Varma]: to be in that particular bubble.
[Amit Varma]: And you spoke about how, you know, it was a texture of your life that you're going for
[Amit Varma]: Eid to your friend's house, you're coming for Ganesh Chaturthi or whatever to your house.
[Amit Varma]: And it's just a completely normal thing.
[Amit Varma]: And that got me to thinking about, again, one of the themes I keep coming back to during
[Amit Varma]: the show, the distinction sort of between the abstract and the concrete in our lives.
[Amit Varma]: And by and large, what I see is that when we engage with the concrete world, when we
[Amit Varma]: are mindful to it, I think there is a quality of experience that is important and also quality
[Amit Varma]: of empathy that that brings about that I am meeting friends who are different from me
[Amit Varma]: and I'm looking them in the eye and we are sharing stories with each other and there's
[Amit Varma]: no electronic device there and it is concrete.
[Amit Varma]: And I think two ways in which the abstract has impinged upon this.
[Amit Varma]: And one is, of course, the age old way of the danger of abstract concepts like nationalism
[Amit Varma]: and purity and the other and, you know, historical grievances from the past, which are for all
[Amit Varma]: practical purposes, abstractions as well in this current time, and all of these impinge
[Amit Varma]: upon us and by, yeah, and when we start thinking in terms of those abstractions that, oh, he's
[Amit Varma]: a Muslim or he's a Dalit or he's Savannah or whatever, that at some level we rob them
[Amit Varma]: of their humanity and that becomes a problem.
[Amit Varma]: So this is one level in which those abstractions become a problem.
[Amit Varma]: And another level in which they become a problem is the thing that you mentioned that when
[Amit Varma]: you were kids, you would meet for dinner every day, you, your brother, your parents would
[Amit Varma]: all meet and you would talk to each other.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, there were no smartphones in this day.
[Amit Varma]: And today you might have enforced the rule in your house.
[Amit Varma]: But in general, it's tough, like, you know, I was at a cafe the other day and I didn't
[Amit Varma]: look into my phone.
[Amit Varma]: I was just looking around and I felt people looked at me like I'm a psychopath.
[Unknown]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: What is he doing?
[Guest]: Why isn't he?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Where is his screen?
[Amit Varma]: You know, did something terrible happen and he doesn't have a screen?
[Amit Varma]: And so even when we are with people in the concrete, we are in the abstract worlds that
[Amit Varma]: we are engrossed in, in our smartphones.
[Amit Varma]: And I just feel that this is dangerous, like, look, net net, I'm not a Luddite, I love technology.
[Amit Varma]: It has transformed my life in unbelievable ways.
[Amit Varma]: And given me so many more friends through these abstract interactions that begin like
[Amit Varma]: that and then we meet.
[Amit Varma]: And I love that, you know, you and I are sitting here today because of all this technology
[Amit Varma]: has enabled this, right.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, you know, I think about this dehumanization.
[Amit Varma]: And I wonder if that is a cause for the polarization that we increasingly see around us in our
[Amit Varma]: discourse.
[Amit Varma]: Because if we more and more stop thinking of other people as real complex people, you
[Amit Varma]: know, with complicated stories, and instead think of them as categories of people.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I begin to think that if I disagree with you, that means that you're evil.
[Amit Varma]: It's not just a disagreement.
[Amit Varma]: And we see so much of this toxic polarization on social media from all sides.
[Amit Varma]: So what are your thoughts on this, especially because you teach young people, you know,
[Amit Varma]: in a university, which is a liberal arts university, and some have even complained that Ashoka
[Amit Varma]: is so woke.
[Amit Varma]: So, I mean, I don't know what the truth of that is.
[Amit Varma]: I'm always happy to give the benefit of the doubt to people and not go in for easy stereotyping.
[Amit Varma]: But what's your sort of...
[Guest]: No, I mean, it's absolutely, I agree with you completely.
[Guest]: And that's what I tell, I mean, try to convey to students.
[Guest]: Children don't really listen to parents.
[Guest]: But at least my hope is that somewhere something sticks.
[Guest]: And the reason I feel a little optimistic and the reason I think that yes, something
[Guest]: sticks because one of the courses I teach is statistics.
[Guest]: So that's, of course, statistics, and that's more technical.
[Guest]: But the other course I teach is what is called economics of discrimination.
[Guest]: And I give a lot of real life examples.
[Guest]: And I see a lot of resistance to what I'm saying in the classroom.
[Guest]: But every year from some batch of students that I've taught at the Delhi School or at
[Guest]: Ashoka, some student will write saying, Hi, Professor, I was watching this movie and I
[Guest]: thought of you because, remember, you said this in class, and this is what that movie
[Guest]: showed or this incident happened in my life.
[Guest]: And remember, you had mentioned this about women, and this is what I saw.
[Guest]: And suddenly, it resonates, you know.
[Guest]: So I think that it's important to keep talking, you know, to younger people without sounding
[Guest]: like a Luddite or whatever.
[Guest]: But it's also true that in general, the spaces where you can have open conversations, which
[Guest]: outline nuances, those spaces are shrinking, I feel.
[Guest]: And it's not the left or the right or whatever issue.
[Guest]: It's like you have to take black and white positions on everything, you know, and human
[Guest]: beings are complex, none of us are black and all white, you know.
[Guest]: Just the other day, I was watching Choti Si Baat again, after so many years, and of course,
[Guest]: what strikes you is the pre-liberalization, India, etc, etc, all of that.
[Guest]: But Vidya Sinha is a working woman in Bombay.
[Guest]: You know, we never find out about her family, because that's irrelevant to the story.
[Guest]: So she's a working woman who's taking a decision about whether to marry Amol Palakir, eventually
[Guest]: they marry, of course, but her courtship with Amol Palakir.
[Guest]: And she goes in a bus, she reads a book, every time she sits in the bus, she opens a book
[Guest]: and starts reading, right?
[Guest]: She plays table tennis for her office, with Asrani, mixed doubles.
[Guest]: And she goes for chess championships, Asrani is playing, etc.
[Guest]: I'd forgotten these little details.
[Guest]: And then for lunch, they meet in the Samovar cafe and all of that.
[Guest]: So in a very easygoing manner, she's always in a saree, she's not this Zeena Damaan Parveen
[Guest]: Babi, westernized kind of a heroine, etc, but at the same time, because Amol Palakir
[Guest]: is so diffident, he goes to a life coach who's Ashok Kumar, who teaches how to patao a girl
[Guest]: basically.
[Guest]: Now, obviously, that part of the movie today, it will be cancelled immediately, because
[Guest]: how can you patao a girl and all of that.
[Guest]: And I realized, I appreciate that point of view.
[Guest]: But if today we were to cancel Choti Si Baat, because in that the character goes to Ashok
[Guest]: Kumar to learn these confidence building tricks, that would be a real pity.
[Guest]: You know, because the film in many ways, the portrayal of Vidya Sinha is far more progressive
[Guest]: than the way in which you see even today in all this, you know, liberalized cinema, where
[Guest]: women are supposed to be, they are very well dressed and all the rest of it.
[Guest]: But where do you see characters like this just getting into a bus and opening a book
[Guest]: and reading, you know, and also struck by the ease with which it was done in the film.
[Guest]: Her family is not important.
[Guest]: She's telling her office mate that, oh, you know, there's this boy who follows me, he's
[Guest]: cute.
[Guest]: I think he wants me, but he's diffident.
[Guest]: And he thinks I don't know, but actually I know it's all very, very amazing and actually
[Guest]: quite progressive.
[Guest]: But it has this element of the life coach and how do you characterize Choti Si Baat?
[Guest]: In today's day and age, cancel, you know, that that would be the thing.
[Guest]: I don't think so.
[Guest]: I don't agree.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I think this tendency to pass judgment on things, definitive judgments is so toxic.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I understand the incentive.
[Amit Varma]: You go online, you want a sense of community and belonging and being respected, you join
[Amit Varma]: a tribe.
[Unknown]: How do you raise your status in that tribe?
[Unknown]: You do it by signaling your virtue.
[Unknown]: How do you do that?
[Amit Varma]: One of the ways is to purity tests on other people in your tribe.
[Amit Varma]: And the other way is just attacking the other side, never engaging with arguments, but attacking
[Amit Varma]: people.
[Amit Varma]: And I think this whole like, I would urge my listeners that every time you pass judgment
[Amit Varma]: on something, think about the intrinsic motivation of that, because by passing judgment on that,
[Amit Varma]: you are elevating yourself to a higher level, whether that's a higher ascetic level or a
[Amit Varma]: moral level or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: It's an act of self aggrandizement.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, this doesn't mean that we don't condemn something that should be condemned.
[Amit Varma]: Like in terms of values, you see someone behaving really badly.
[Unknown]: Sure.
[Amit Varma]: Of course, it's your duty to condemn it, right?
[Amit Varma]: It's your duty to speak out against injustice and all the wrong that you see in the world.
[Amit Varma]: But sometimes we take it too far.
[Amit Varma]: And I certainly think and you've written a great article about this as well, which I'll
[Amit Varma]: link from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: But sometimes we take it too far, like when you're condemning a film for something that
[Amit Varma]: happened at a particular point in time.
[Amit Varma]: And the point is one movies are art is meant to depict the world as it is not an idealized
[Amit Varma]: version of the world as it should be.
[Amit Varma]: So to conflate the two, I think is immature and dangerous.
[Amit Varma]: And I think you also, when you do that, you deprive yourself of the joy of a lot of art,
[Amit Varma]: because you're viewing it just through like one ideological lens, and one political lens.
[Amit Varma]: And you're not sort of, you know, appreciating all the complexities within any good work
[Amit Varma]: of art.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't remember Chhoti Si Baat, I must have seen it a decade ago, perhaps.
[Amit Varma]: But everything that you're saying makes me think that yeah, this is a film I would, you
[Amit Varma]: know, love to see again, and there must be so much in it.
[Amit Varma]: Just the casual act of a woman opening a book in a bus, like typically, a lot of Bollywood
[Amit Varma]: people would edit that out, because there'll be nothing happening in that scene.
[Amit Varma]: But just a conscious choice of keeping that scene in, to show something about the character
[Amit Varma]: says something to me.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, I had forgotten a lot of this when I saw it again.
[Guest]: And of course, that came back because I'd seen it a couple of times.
[Guest]: No, and you know, going back to the sort of the actors in my family, and they say that
[Guest]: the challenge of being an actor is to be able to portray roles that are not like yourself.
[Guest]: You know, if we only played the extensions of our own personalities on screen, then what
[Guest]: is there to acting?
[Guest]: And the reason that they are such good actors is because they're able to portray a variety
[Guest]: of characters that are very different from the way they are as individuals.
[Guest]: And what would you do about creativity if you just model people like clones, you know,
[Guest]: of in some idealized world?
[Guest]: And even on that, there's no agreement.
[Guest]: I mean, what you think is ideal, I may not agree with you on that question, right?
[Guest]: So I find this, I find the lack of nuance.
[Guest]: And we see that in academic circles as well, which is, you know, everything is black and
[Guest]: white and or should be if not, if it isn't.
[Guest]: And I don't understand the disinclination to engage with nuance, because I guess engaging
[Guest]: with nuance makes it harder.
[Guest]: Because then you have to acknowledge all facets, you have to say, okay, this is a multifaceted
[Guest]: problem.
[Guest]: You know, there's a whole debate on women's labor force participation, for example, it's
[Guest]: extremely multifaceted, it's very difficult to give this one explanation that fits all
[Guest]: sizes at all times, yet, you know, people are, you know, that's what they like to do.
[Guest]: Because it makes for bite, you know, news bites type of news.
[Guest]: It's a very tricky terrain, it's like a slope, slope, because it's like that line from that
[Guest]: Rajkumar says, and I think Vakta or something,
[Guest]: You know, because the minute you start virtue singling and attacking other people, tomorrow
[Guest]: you will get attacked for something that you will say.
[Guest]: So it's a never ending thing, because people are just waiting for an opportunity to get
[Guest]: back at you, you know, so it's just best to, I mean, I believe in data very much.
[Guest]: So even my pieces on film, etc, you will see it's all backed by data.
[Guest]: Even the Lata piece is all, you know, examples, I mean, my point is, you're making an argument,
[Guest]: give me examples.
[Guest]: I'll listen to you if you give me examples.
[Guest]: But if you're making an ideological statement without any examples, not interested.
[Guest]: Same is true of women's labor force participation or caste discrimination or affirmative action
[Guest]: or any problem, you know.
[Guest]: If you make assertions without data or examples, then what are you saying?
[Amit Varma]: Then you belong on Twitter, you don't belong on Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: On that delightful note, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: But you the listener, kindly do not check Twitter during this break.
[Amit Varma]: Kindly keep listening.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, chances are that many of you first heard of me because of my blog India Uncut,
[Amit Varma]: which was active between 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat popular at the time.
[Amit Varma]: I love the freedom the form gave me.
[Amit Varma]: And I feel I was shaped by it in many ways.
[Amit Varma]: I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced to think about many different things
[Amit Varma]: because I wrote about many different things.
[Amit Varma]: Well, that phase in my life ended for various reasons.
[Amit Varma]: And now it is time to revive it.
[Amit Varma]: Only now I'm doing it through a newsletter.
[Amit Varma]: I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com where I will write
[Amit Varma]: regularly about whatever catches my fancy.
[Amit Varma]: I'll write about some of the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else.
[Amit Varma]: So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe.
[Amit Varma]: It is free.
[Amit Varma]: Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need to go anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So subscribe now for free.
[Amit Varma]: The India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Ashwini Deshpande.
[Amit Varma]: Abhi kitna bole aapke baare mein, you know, singer, sitar player, you know, Renaissance
[Amit Varma]: woman as it were.
[Amit Varma]: You've described your father as a Renaissance man.
[Amit Varma]: So that's where it comes from.
[Amit Varma]: And so many other things.
[Amit Varma]: But let's now, you know, get to that part of the personal journey where we talk about
[Amit Varma]: your work and how you got to your work.
[Amit Varma]: You mentioned earlier that you wanted to be like a medical doctor.
[Amit Varma]: And but and baha se aap academics mein aagayi and became another kind of doctor entirely.
[Guest]: So tell us about it.
[Guest]: Pehli baat toh yeh ki, you know, dil ko behlane ke liye gaale bhi ek khayal achcha hai.
[Guest]: Ki mai yeh bhi hoon, wo bhi hoon, apne khayalon mein toh, khayali pulao pakana badi achchi
[Guest]: baat hoti hai.
[Amit Varma]: I'll encourage everybody to do that.
[Amit Varma]: Are you a daydreamer?
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: So what kind of daydreams do you have?
[Guest]: I cannot talk about that on air, but yeah, you know, I yeah, so but it's nice.
[Guest]: It's always nice.
[Guest]: You know, I get these emails that are meant for Ashwini Bire Deshpande, the classical
[Guest]: singer and often they are, oh, your concert last night was phenomenal.
[Guest]: And I just believe it's about me.
[Guest]: It makes me so happy.
[Guest]: You know, so bas that's the kind of email I would love to receive.
[Guest]: So I think ki mere liye likha hoga zarur.
[Amit Varma]: Aur Ashwini ji ko bhi messages aate honge that thank you so much for, you know, your
[Guest]: book on caste.
[Guest]: I learned so much about the economics of discrimination.
[Guest]: I will tell you one story and then I'll answer earlier question, which is that all all my
[Guest]: life I've been receiving mails about her.
[Guest]: And whenever it's about logistics or some, you know, kahan, auditorium, yeh wo details,
[Guest]: I write back to them saying, you have reached the wrong person, please write.
[Guest]: So that because I don't want the any mess up in her programs.
[Guest]: And whenever it's a random praise about the concert, I take it, I accept the praise about
[Guest]: my wonderful concert.
[Guest]: But last year, during the pandemic, the Hindustan Times was trying to get in touch with me to
[Guest]: get me to write an article on women's labor force participation.
[Guest]: So I got a call and I think I must have been on Zoom or something and I didn't answer it.
[Guest]: So I called back and the person, the journalist said, who's this?
[Guest]: I said, Ashwini Deshpande, I believe I got a call from you.
[Guest]: So they said, oh, but we've already talked.
[Guest]: So I said, no, because I was on a, on a Zoom call.
[Guest]: They said, but you, you, you know, we wanted an article from you about women's labor force
[Guest]: participation and you agreed.
[Guest]: So I said, no, I don't, I didn't have that conversation with anyone.
[Guest]: And so I said, okay, whatever it is fine.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't understand what's, it didn't occur to me at that time what might have happened.
[Guest]: And I said, okay, maybe this is a mistake.
[Guest]: So bye.
[Guest]: And so I disconnected and about half an hour later, I got a call from the same journalist
[Guest]: saying, I'm so sorry, there's been a mistake.
[Guest]: So apparently they got through to Ashwini Bhire Deshpande and they asked her to write
[Guest]: about women and work and all that.
[Guest]: And because she's a professional working woman, in addition to being a fabulous artist, she
[Guest]: said, oh, but I don't know whether I can write an article on women and work and all that.
[Guest]: And she thought maybe they've been, they've asked her to write because she's a scientist
[Guest]: at BRC, et cetera.
[Guest]: And she's okay.
[Guest]: Let me try.
[Unknown]: Who wrote it?
[Amit Varma]: I wrote it.
[Guest]: The fact that she was mistaken for me was a high point in my life because I really look
[Guest]: up to her.
[Amit Varma]: We are kind of the same age.
[Guest]: Did they call her back and tell her that, sorry, ma'am, wrong Ashwini.
[Guest]: But in the end, I wrote that article.
[Amit Varma]: It was for women's day last year.
[Amit Varma]: Have you met her?
[Guest]: I have met her as in, the thing is that not only do we share a name, first name, first
[Guest]: names of our parents are identical.
[Guest]: And apparently there's some connection between my mother's side of the family and her family,
[Guest]: some complicated relationship I'd forgotten right now.
[Guest]: But one of the times that we went to a concert, my mother and I went up and my mother introduced
[Guest]: herself saying, I'm so-and-so, et cetera, et cetera.
[Guest]: And she immediately knew who my mother was.
[Guest]: And then I was introduced and I said, oh, my name is also Ashwini and she said, oh,
[Guest]: yes.
[Guest]: So, yes, I've met her in that.
[Amit Varma]: So her parents are also called Kalindi and Govind.
[Guest]: Well, Govind and actually my mother's story of my mother's name Kalindi is a separate
[Guest]: one, maybe another time.
[Guest]: But my mother was when she was born, she was named Manik.
[Guest]: So her parents are named Manik and Govind.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: So Manik Bide, the well-known singer is her mother.
[Amit Varma]: Fantastic.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So getting back to your academic journey, I wish we could talk about your journey to
[Amit Varma]: becoming a, you know, this is a moment in the episode where both of us should discover
[Amit Varma]: with a shock that I invited the wrong Ashwini and I thought I was talking to that one.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me about when you gave your first concert and there should be that shock of recognition
[Guest]: on both our faces that, oh, my God, sorry, I called you by mistake, I'm sorry, I didn't
[Guest]: call you.
[Guest]: Yes, but you also tell me what to do.
[Guest]: No, you know, I told you earlier about how I dropped out of music lessons, dance lessons.
[Guest]: So my mother, you know, was ever an optimist.
[Guest]: And so my despite the numerous times I dropped out of classes, she always believed that the
[Guest]: next time it will be for keeps.
[Guest]: So she enrolled me in vocal music classes, Kathak classes, Sitar classes, and I kept
[Guest]: dropping out at different times.
[Guest]: Because at the time when it gets really difficult, that's the point I lose in.
[Guest]: I mean, I say, okay, I don't have the time to do this.
[Guest]: So I, when I moved to class 11, of course, I took science.
[Guest]: And all my classmates who were going for engineering or medicine, that was what everybody in my
[Guest]: class was doing.
[Guest]: They enrolled for these after school lessons, you know, these coaching classes, such Deva
[Guest]: medical or Evo.
[Guest]: So basically, after school, you go straight to coaching class.
[Guest]: And by the time you get home, it's about 8-8.30 at night.
[Guest]: So I said, do I have to spend two years like this?
[Guest]: So everyone said, yeah, otherwise you can't crack the entrance exam.
[Guest]: And if you want to get into any decent medical college, you have to do this.
[Guest]: So I said, I can't do it.
[Guest]: So I went for one or two days.
[Guest]: And it's madness.
[Guest]: You know, there are these tiny rooms full of sweaty students.
[Guest]: And some boring person who is just giving you questions, you know, like, basically.
[Guest]: So I said, there's no way.
[Guest]: This is not happening.
[Guest]: So I told my parents, I said, if this is the condition for medical exams, I don't want
[Guest]: to take it.
[Guest]: So my parents said, you only decided to take it, we didn't ask you to do it, but then figure
[Guest]: out what you want to do.
[Guest]: I mean, you are free to choose.
[Guest]: So in between, I had some dreams of becoming a pure scientist, like a research scientist.
[Guest]: So I, in my 11th and 12th class projects, I took up some projects which were, so I wanted
[Guest]: to be a biology.
[Guest]: So I went to Pusa Institute, I developed a project on mutation, etc, etc.
[Guest]: So I was interested in genetics.
[Guest]: So I thought that that's what I'll do.
[Guest]: Then by the time it came to applying for colleges, everyone said, oh, but you know, BSc biology
[Guest]: karke kya karogi and you know, it's, there's no value of this degree, etc, etc.
[Guest]: So I mean, basically, I was not hearing good things about doing a BSc in biology.
[Guest]: So I said, then what do I do?
[Guest]: I mean, I'm not doing medicine, I'm not going to do BSc in biology.
[Guest]: What what am I going to do with because I had, I had no social science background, you
[Guest]: know, the only thing I studied was fiction, or I would do my science work or whatever.
[Guest]: So I said, Okay, what is the subject that I can do where I can put all this mathematics
[Guest]: and everything to use economics.
[Guest]: So I got into econ by default.
[Guest]: So I've been a little bit on the margins, I got into econ as default, then even the
[Guest]: kind of economics has do is, you know, not, I haven't had a career path, like many of
[Guest]: the other economists who've been on your show, where you go abroad, you do a PhD in a good
[Guest]: university, you get into a, you know, good department, you go this very high level, heavy
[Guest]: level publishing, that route, etc.
[Guest]: So I haven't really, my career trajectory has not been that.
[Guest]: So it's a series of accidents that have basically, that I've landed up where I've landed up.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, when you started doing econ as a subject, and I think what happens sometimes,
[Amit Varma]: where you fall in love with the subject while studying it, is that first you start studying
[Amit Varma]: it as a subject, ki textbooks mein yeh saare chapters hai, yeh subjects hai, yeh seekho,
[Amit Varma]: woh seekho.
[Amit Varma]: But then, hopefully, you know, there comes that moment where it starts to connect itself
[Amit Varma]: to the real world.
[Amit Varma]: And where you can, like what I, I didn't study economics, but what, what made me fall in
[Amit Varma]: love with economics was when I realised that this is not about numbers and finance and
[Amit Varma]: economy and all of that, it's about human behaviour, you're studying, you're studying
[Amit Varma]: the effects of scarcity, you're studying incentives, you're studying the why people do what they
[Amit Varma]: do.
[Amit Varma]: And that just applies to everything.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that, that that was like a magical transformation for me to realise that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, economics gives me the frames and the tools to understand life, you know.
[Amit Varma]: So was there a moment like that for you, like how did that process happen, where it goes
[Amit Varma]: from being a dry subject that you're studying for a degree to something that just shapes
[Amit Varma]: the way you look at the world?
[Guest]: Very much later.
[Guest]: And I, I don't think very much like a mainstream traditional economist in any case, just at
[Guest]: a personal level.
[Guest]: So I have always been a little bit on the margin.
[Guest]: So I, I did, you know, you take exams, you learn, you study for the exams, you sort of,
[Guest]: you do whatever you do in the exam.
[Guest]: So that's one part of the story.
[Guest]: My PhD was not on any of this, you know, discrimination, caste, gender, social identity, nothing, none
[Guest]: of this.
[Guest]: I barely knew the contours of, not that I know a lot now, but I know a little bit more
[Guest]: than I knew at that time, which was zero.
[Guest]: And I, my PhD was on international debt and specifically looking at the debt crisis of
[Guest]: the 1970s.
[Guest]: And it had very little data, there was a tiny section with some data, but more or less,
[Guest]: it was theory.
[Guest]: So it was models and et cetera.
[Guest]: So while of course it was about people and all that, but it didn't directly connect with
[Guest]: people in, in this very organic way or a real way.
[Guest]: And I thought that's what I'll do.
[Guest]: I'll just keep writing papers of, you know, that kind, et cetera.
[Guest]: And then after I finished my PhD, I started sending out my chapters to journals.
[Guest]: And I had a book contract from OUP to write a book, extending my thesis to look at the
[Guest]: Mexican debt crisis, which has, which had just, there was another wave of the Mexican
[Guest]: debt default and the negotiations and all that, the details of which I miss are escaping
[Guest]: me now, but that was that.
[Guest]: And again, another accident happened, which is that one of my papers that I had submitted
[Guest]: to a journal, one of the referees of that paper was an American economist who got in
[Guest]: touch with me to say that I should not be telling you this, but I'm a referee at this
[Guest]: journal for this paper that you've sent.
[Guest]: And I really like it, et cetera, et cetera.
[Guest]: And he sent me an email and I obviously had cited his work.
[Guest]: So email was very new.
[Guest]: There was no Google.
[Guest]: So I couldn't Google this person to, you know, see what, what he looked like or whatever.
[Guest]: And I was completely taken aback, obviously thrilled that to hear from someone who had
[Guest]: cited at a very young age, I mean, that's, that was just a real high.
[Guest]: And we started chatting over email.
[Guest]: And then he said to me, would you like to come to the US for a postdoc?
[Guest]: Of course, I didn't even know what a postdoc was at that time, because even now in India,
[Guest]: postdocs are not very common, but at that time I had zero clue about any of this.
[Guest]: And I said, what does it mean?
[Guest]: So he told me it will be a two year fellowship, no teaching, et cetera.
[Guest]: And long story short, I landed up there with my book contract and I said, you know, I don't
[Guest]: have to teach, so I can do all this.
[Guest]: And then we would talk every now and then he would talk about, oh, so what do you think
[Guest]: about the caste system in India?
[Guest]: You know, have you looked at gaps between caste groups and all that?
[Guest]: And I kept saying, I said, no, that's sociology.
[Guest]: That's not economics.
[Guest]: Economists in India don't look at all this.
[Guest]: And Delhi school at that time was, you know, one of the centers where very path breaking
[Guest]: work on Indian poverty was coming out.
[Guest]: But none of it was differentiated by social identity.
[Guest]: So we talked about the poor and the non-poor or the rich and the poor, but not by whether
[Guest]: they were male, female, this or that caste or anything.
[Guest]: And he said, no, economists, and of course, after I went there, I discovered that he was
[Guest]: African American, which I didn't know.
[Guest]: And he said, no, I work on racial inequalities and economists in the U.S. work on racial
[Guest]: inequalities.
[Guest]: It's a very legitimate field of inquiry.
[Guest]: And I said, well, not in India.
[Guest]: Nobody works on, no economist works on caste in India.
[Guest]: And I said, there's no data anyway.
[Guest]: So what, you know, what are we talking about here?
[Guest]: And so there's this data set called National Family Health Survey, NFHS, which is now in
[Guest]: its fifth round.
[Guest]: At that time, the second round had come out and he said, you can use this data.
[Guest]: Of course, I'd never actually used household survey data.
[Guest]: I'd only studied about it in a textbook.
[Guest]: And studying about a regression in a textbook is a completely different cup of tea from
[Guest]: figuring out how to run anything on the computer, in which I had zero skills at that time.
[Guest]: But I couldn't admit to him that I had never used household survey data.
[Guest]: So I said, yeah, sure, I can look at it.
[Guest]: And then I got another student to help and I said, you know, I need to learn some of
[Guest]: these packages because I've never used them.
[Guest]: So he taught me one, actually a rather difficult package at that time, not Stata, which I use
[Guest]: now.
[Guest]: So I picked up some things and I eventually I wrote, and then I kept calling my father
[Guest]: every week, send me readings, send me this, I don't know what the caste system is, I need
[Guest]: to understand it detailed, you know, knowing about it in a sort of rough way is one thing,
[Guest]: but to study any social category seriously.
[Guest]: So I did a lot of work that is not by economists at all, you know, and so my father really
[Guest]: helped me sending references.
[Guest]: And I wrote my first paper, which I thought would be, just people will say, okay, fine,
[Guest]: we knew all this already.
[Guest]: So what's new about this paper?
[Guest]: I thought that's the kind of reception it will get.
[Guest]: But it got the opposite reception.
[Guest]: People said, oh, this is new.
[Amit Varma]: We didn't know this, etc.
[Amit Varma]: What was the paper on?
[Guest]: It was just, so basically, the National Family Health Survey data has no income or consumption
[Guest]: data or wages.
[Guest]: So anything that economists would say, okay, I want to look at incomes, I want to look
[Guest]: at wages, but it has data on occupation, education, land ownership, etc.
[Guest]: So I created an index, like a human development index, and literally the same formula, and
[Guest]: I just called it the caste development index.
[Guest]: And so I thought it was a very simple paper.
[Guest]: And using the CDI, I showed the gap between the upper caste and the Dalits, all India
[Guest]: and across states and in each dimension.
[Guest]: So I took five variables for the caste development index.
[Guest]: And of course, you can look at the aggregate index, but you can look at each of those variables
[Guest]: as well.
[Guest]: And basically, I showed that in each of those components, there was a gap between the upper
[Guest]: caste in every state of the country and the Dalits, and I quantified that gap.
[Guest]: That's all the paper was.
[Guest]: But it was a surprise to people to see this at the national level, in the context of the
[Guest]: argument that the caste system is, you know, the hierarchies are narrowing, castes are
[Guest]: basically vote blocks.
[Guest]: So Dalits are no longer as badly off, economically speaking, as people believe them to be, because
[Guest]: political parties are vying for their votes, all the narrative about either a complete
[Guest]: upturning of the caste hierarchy, or certainly, of course, this was one point in time.
[Guest]: So we couldn't say anything about flattening or not, that work I've done later.
[Guest]: And this was just taking a snapshot in five indicators of well-being, what are the gaps
[Guest]: looking like between upper caste and Dalits.
[Guest]: And I really didn't think that anybody would read that paper or would find it interesting.
[Guest]: So very gingerly, I sent it to four or five people, fully expecting to be told that, okay,
[Guest]: fine, you know, pat on the back and now go back to doing your work.
[Guest]: So I thought I'll go back to my Mexico book, and, you know, this was just to mainly to
[Guest]: not have to keep on having that same argument with my mentor.
[Guest]: And then he loved the paper, and as did some others, and I presented it at a few places.
[Guest]: And I was a little surprised by the reaction it got.
[Guest]: And I said, how could people not know this already?
[Guest]: I mean, why is this not common knowledge?
[Guest]: It seemed very intuitive to me.
[Guest]: And so I wrote that paper, and I sent it to a journal, got published.
[Guest]: Then somebody said, oh, I'm doing a book, can you just now look at gender also?
[Guest]: I said, oh, come on, give me a break.
[Guest]: I just did one paper with caste, now you want me to look at male, female also?
[Guest]: And then Sandy said, well, why not?
[Guest]: You have the data, just do male, female, and just do the same index again and show the
[Guest]: gaps between.
[Guest]: So I did four categories, upper caste men, upper caste women, Dalit men, and Dalit women.
[Guest]: And that shows a very interesting hierarchies.
[Guest]: That's how I started thinking about gender, because between for men, upper caste men are
[Guest]: better off than Dalit men, across all dimensions.
[Guest]: But for women, on material indicators, upper caste women are better off.
[Guest]: But this data set also has a whole lot of mobility and freedom of choice questions.
[Guest]: And there, at that time, upper caste women were not necessarily better off compared to
[Guest]: Dalit women.
[Guest]: So then I wrote a paper about the trade-off, you know, that women face, but not men.
[Guest]: And then I linked a lot to the Brahmanical patriarchy, literature, I read Uma Chakravorty,
[Guest]: I read a lot of things.
[Guest]: Then my mother sent me readings, my father sent me readings, you know, then it just one
[Guest]: thing led to the other kind of a thing, it started.
[Guest]: And the two years that I spent in the US just went, just reading.
[Guest]: And because I was not teaching, I had more time.
[Guest]: And I wrote a few papers, and then I never wrote that book.
[Guest]: And when I came back, I thought, okay, maybe I'll write the book.
[Guest]: But by the time I came back, I was pretty sure that that's not going to happen.
[Guest]: Because then I introduced this course called economics of discrimination in the Delhi School,
[Guest]: which was interestingly opposed both by my colleagues in the economics department, and
[Guest]: sociologists.
[Guest]: Because some of my colleagues felt this is not economics.
[Guest]: And sociologists felt economists have no business talking about caste.
[Guest]: And what is this reducing caste disparity to a number, you know, 26% don't have land
[Guest]: or 32% or whatever, reducing and what is this category called schedule caste, there's so
[Guest]: much heterogeneity within.
[Guest]: So by aggregating, you are, you know, essentializing, etc, etc.
[Guest]: So I learned new words.
[Guest]: I said, Okay, fine, I'm not arguing that there's no heterogeneity, yet, on the aggregate, this
[Guest]: category of groups has markedly lower outcomes than that category of individuals.
[Guest]: That's all I'm saying, not to deny heterogeneity within each of these categories.
[Guest]: And that's something that tells us something.
[Guest]: So that's how the this agenda started, and I never went back to international debt.
[Guest]: And now it's literally I finished one paper, and while I'm doing that, there are five others
[Guest]: that have already started, which is, I know, not a good way of working.
[Guest]: But it's just questions that people are sometimes, it could be a random, something somebody posts
[Guest]: on Twitter, and give me an idea saying, Oh, this is interesting, I should, I can look
[Guest]: at this or something like that, you know, so it's the world is giving you ideas, basically.
[Guest]: And conversations give you like, today, I might come up with, you know, think of you
[Guest]: might ask me something, and that can get me set me thinking about something.
[Guest]: So then, that's, now I do work, which I think relates to the lives of people.
[Guest]: But it's come very late in my career, but I'm really enjoying it.
[Guest]: I mean, I think this is the best part of my academic career.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, earlier in the episode, I was thinking that maybe through the course of
[Amit Varma]: this episode, I should persuade Ashwini Ji or rather Ashwini as you're a young person
[Amit Varma]: to sort of write more about music and, you know, go back to that love.
[Amit Varma]: But now just seeing the excitement on your face, you know, I can I can see how much this
[Amit Varma]: work kind of means to you and I totally get that.
[Amit Varma]: When you did that first paper, is it that you thought that it is obvious because everybody
[Amit Varma]: of course knows the conclusion that upper castes are much better off than lower castes.
[Amit Varma]: But the learning from that, and I'm just thinking aloud here is that these numbers matter quantifying
[Amit Varma]: this stuff matters because not just you get a snapshot of how things are at a particular
[Amit Varma]: point in time, which may even seem obvious, but over time when you have different data
[Amit Varma]: sets from different years and different points, you can actually see social movement and you
[Amit Varma]: can actually have a sense of what is working and what is not and the direction that we
[Amit Varma]: are going in.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, these numbers sort of matter and that therefore, in a sense, these numbers
[Amit Varma]: come to life, like a mistake that non that that people who sort of don't engage with
[Amit Varma]: numbers and and our brains are not wired to tackle big numbers, they just kind of blank
[Amit Varma]: out and it's just abstract.
[Amit Varma]: And a mistake that people often make when they think about economics is that, yeah,
[Amit Varma]: tk numbers, I am market up or down, I graph and what is the connection with the real world.
[Amit Varma]: But what all of your work does, especially because it is in these two areas, caste and
[Amit Varma]: gender is that it illuminates so much that affects real people in the real world.
[Amit Varma]: And we can see this all around us.
[Amit Varma]: So is that a correct characterization?
[Guest]: I think that I think that numbers are very important because, you know, all of us are
[Guest]: intelligent and can make assertions.
[Guest]: All of us see the life world around us and we can make conclusions based upon what we
[Guest]: see around us.
[Guest]: But now that I teach statistics, the importance of correct sampling is more obvious to me
[Guest]: than it ever was before, because I am teaching statistics to 18 year olds.
[Guest]: And therefore, how you sample is supremely important to the conclusions you're going
[Guest]: to get.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, just to illustrate as a very lay person, you know, to a very lay person,
[Guest]: supposing you have a salad with multiple layers of things like cheese and lettuce and whatever,
[Guest]: tomatoes and pieces of chicken or whatever.
[Unknown]: Bacon at the very top.
[Guest]: And you don't mix it, right?
[Guest]: And you take a bite out of it.
[Guest]: Now, depending on how deep your fork has gone in, you will taste only the layers that have
[Guest]: that are in your mouth and you can draw a conclusion about that.
[Guest]: That won't be a wrong conclusion based on what you ate, but it is a wrong conclusion
[Guest]: about the salad bowl.
[Guest]: So anything that you say about the top two layers would be an incorrect representation
[Guest]: of the salad bowl if it is not well mixed.
[Guest]: And if your spoonful is not picking up elements of all the layers that are in the salad bowl,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So when you sample, I mean, obviously, whenever we draw conclusions from data, we are not
[Guest]: taking a census of 1.6 billion people, otherwise we'll never get any conclusions done.
[Guest]: That is why the importance of correct sampling cannot be overemphasized.
[Guest]: Otherwise, there are impressions and those impressions are fine.
[Guest]: You know, I go out in the street and I see somebody doing something and based upon that
[Guest]: one person, I'll say something, you know, oh, this person is very hardworking or not
[Guest]: or whatever it might be, right?
[Guest]: Now that is my impression based upon the street outside the studio, which is a valid impression
[Guest]: of the street outside the studio.
[Guest]: But if I said that my visual impression of the street outside the studio says something
[Guest]: about the population of Delhi or India, that would be a wrong conclusion.
[Guest]: And now that I teach statistics and basic statistical methods, I always knew this theoretically
[Guest]: and obviously, you know, that's what I've been working on.
[Guest]: But trying to explain this to 18 year olds, 19 year olds has brought a clarity in my own
[Guest]: thinking about the importance of sampling that I cannot convey to everybody strongly
[Guest]: enough.
[Guest]: And that's what really bothers me when I see conclusions that are based upon incorrect
[Guest]: sampling, right?
[Guest]: And it's not just about choosing a sample, it's about the way you ask a question.
[Guest]: Is it a leading question?
[Guest]: I mean, that even in law, you know, you're not allowed to are leading.
[Guest]: So what I'm trying to say is that when we are drawing conclusions about anything, there
[Guest]: is a certain rigor, there's a certain scientific method, just because it's economics or sociology
[Guest]: or anthropology doesn't mean the scientific method can be disregarded, right?
[Guest]: And so when you do all these things, then the numbers make sense.
[Guest]: So I'll qualify.
[Amit Varma]: Numbers make a lot of sense.
[Amit Varma]: But you have to use them well.
[Guest]: You have to generate them well and use them well, of course.
[Guest]: But first, the generation of the numbers, how is the data coming the way it's coming?
[Guest]: That is a very important step.
[Guest]: And we often don't pay enough attention as much attention to this fact of generating
[Guest]: numbers the right way, as we should be doing.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I couldn't agree more.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, I think that if you take a picture of the street outside the studio, it doesn't
[Amit Varma]: even tell you much about the street outside the studio.
[Amit Varma]: That's a picture at one point in time and things are so dynamic, it's changing, you
[Amit Varma]: are standing in one particular place looking from one particular angle.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I used to be a professional poker player for five years between 2010 and 2015.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that poker taught me, and this is more sort of amplified in poker
[Amit Varma]: than anything else.
[Amit Varma]: And poker, of course, is a game of skill.
[Amit Varma]: But the quantum of luck is extremely high.
[Amit Varma]: So the skill expresses itself only through a large sample size, right?
[Amit Varma]: So you know, so it's so for us, a realistic sample size had to be really large.
[Amit Varma]: You could not tell if somebody had mastered a particular form of the game, by looking
[Amit Varma]: at say 1000 hands or 2000 hands, you needed a couple of million hands at least before
[Amit Varma]: you could safely say that this guy knows what he's doing, right, right, it was that big.
[Amit Varma]: So sometimes, you know, I look at like I look at nutrition studies, Pachas Logo Keto diet
[Amit Varma]: the Pachas Koe diet the and my mental, you know, I have to adjust my biases about sample
[Amit Varma]: size, because I'm just thinking key are yet to kuch bhi nahi hai.
[Amit Varma]: But obviously, for different fields.
[Amit Varma]: So another question you mentioned that in the social sciences, you know, that how you
[Amit Varma]: generate these numbers matters and the method matters and all that are, I was chatting with
[Amit Varma]: my mutual friend Shruti Rajgopalan once about experiments in the social sciences and the
[Amit Varma]: kind of conclusions that we can draw from them.
[Amit Varma]: And she made a very good point and she was citing someone I forget who, but the point
[Amit Varma]: was essentially that let us say that you want to run an experiment on whether dropping a
[Amit Varma]: coin into a particular amount of water will raise will displace a little water and raise
[Amit Varma]: you know, the level of the water or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: Now, in a scientific experiment, what you would do is you would have a lab with controlled
[Amit Varma]: conditions and you would have a beaker of water and you would measure everything and
[Amit Varma]: you would put a coin in there and then you would measure the level again.
[Amit Varma]: And the answer you would get is conclusive and you can establish causation and all of
[Amit Varma]: that.
[Amit Varma]: Now, what happens in the social sciences is you're effectively dropping the coin in a
[Amit Varma]: massive swimming pool full of hundreds of people jumping in and out and there's a storm
[Amit Varma]: overhead and it's raining and that's the result you get and how you know, the water could
[Amit Varma]: go up, it could go down, you can make all kinds of theories about coins and water and
[Amit Varma]: it gets incredibly messy, right?
[Amit Varma]: So that is something that I sometimes think about that what I see in the social sciences
[Amit Varma]: is that the conclusion that people arrive at seems to be determined by the ideologies
[Amit Varma]: or the prisms that they bring to the table.
[Amit Varma]: You know, where you stand depends on where you sit as that old sort of saying goes.
[Amit Varma]: So how do you and this is obviously really broad and you know, the science in the social
[Amit Varma]: sciences has progressed a lot and these are dangers that every serious social scientist
[Amit Varma]: is kind of aware of.
[Amit Varma]: How do you tackle for something like this?
[Guest]: It's hard.
[Guest]: It definitely is hard because as you say, you know, there are what we call confounding
[Guest]: factors because many other things are simultaneously changing.
[Guest]: So getting at causation in an isolated way is hard and the randomized control trial methodology
[Guest]: is precisely trying to do that.
[Guest]: But there are other issues with randomized control trials, which is A, just the difficulty
[Guest]: of doing it.
[Guest]: B, big picture questions can't be tackled by because you're just wearing one little
[Guest]: thing and checking the impact.
[Guest]: I'm not going into that debate because that's very well known.
[Guest]: So the quest for getting the right causation continues, right?
[Guest]: And I don't think there's a magic answer as yet.
[Guest]: But I think as social scientists, we must be aware always of pitfalls.
[Guest]: We must always and I think humility helps here, which that's a very important part.
[Guest]: I think of being this should be an important part of is that I may not be seeing the whole
[Guest]: picture and that may be out there.
[Guest]: So the willingness to learn, the willingness to engage with nuance, you know, the other
[Guest]: thing that that's apart from the fact how data is generated is, as we were talking about
[Guest]: earlier on, you know, related to social media, which is unwillingness to engage with nuance,
[Guest]: you know.
[Guest]: So for example, I'll give you an example in the context of the Indian labor force, female
[Guest]: labor force participation debate, which is there are two problems.
[Guest]: One is labor force participation rate is falling.
[Guest]: The other is violence against women in public spaces.
[Guest]: Now the numbers are increasing, which is always, there's always a question mark about violence
[Guest]: numbers, which is, is it better reporting or is it incident, like are women empowered
[Guest]: enough to report or is it actual incidents going up?
[Guest]: And at the end of the day, there's no firm answer to this, however, whatever it is, but
[Guest]: the numbers at least are rising.
[Guest]: Now both these are very serious problems, but that doesn't mean automatically that they
[Guest]: are related.
[Guest]: You know, so my, my student Jitendra Singh and I, we looked at 146 countries and we got
[Guest]: data on violence against women in public spaces and their female labor force participation
[Guest]: rates and violence against women is a problem everywhere, but we don't find a systematic
[Guest]: relationship between FLFP and, and violence against women in public spaces or violence
[Guest]: against women.
[Guest]: And the one obvious reason for that is that a lot of violence against women takes place
[Guest]: at home.
[Guest]: You know, people say women are afraid to go out and work because they don't want to be
[Guest]: molested, which assumes that at home they will not be molested.
[Guest]: I have, and my co-authors have field, you know, field trip after field trip, women telling
[Guest]: us we want to leave the home, we don't want to be locked up, you know, inside our home
[Guest]: with the husband or father-in-law or whoever, even mother-in-law sometime, which may or
[Guest]: may not be physical violence, but it's certainly abuse, you know?
[Guest]: So if you don't look at violence inside the home, you will always think, oh, it's only
[Guest]: violence outside the home, which is of course a serious problem.
[Guest]: There's no denying that that's an issue, but does it automatically translate into female
[Guest]: labor force participation rates lowering?
[Guest]: Not clear.
[Guest]: But if you've already made up your mind that that's an issue, bas katham, you know?
[Guest]: So I think that there is no harm in acknowledging that the problem is harder to pin down than
[Guest]: this one, this or any other simple explanation for that matter.
[Guest]: You can take, I mean, you can replace violence against women with something else.
[Guest]: Again, there'll be a similar issue.
[Guest]: So as social scientists, we have to be aware of, if you're working with data, which I think
[Guest]: everybody should, but if you're working with data, how that data is generated, how it is
[Guest]: used, how best to establish causality and learn from evidence from other disciplines
[Guest]: in a, for economists, I would say, learn from evidence from other disciplines in a humble
[Guest]: way.
[Guest]: So today, for example, economists have discovered social norms, which other disciplines have
[Guest]: always known.
[Guest]: But now the pendulum has shrunk to the other side, which is when you talk about female
[Guest]: labor force participation rate, no economic factor can possibly explain it.
[Guest]: It only has to be social norms.
[Guest]: Are kyun bhai?
[Guest]: Social norms ki baat karo, toh why can't we simple demand supply factors?
[Guest]: Why aren't Indian women affected by that?
[Guest]: You know, they are as rational human beings as any other human beings on the planet, you
[Guest]: know?
[Guest]: So it's great that economists have broadened their view, you know, horizon, but an incorrect
[Guest]: reading of social norms is actually dangerous to the analysis of the problem into which
[Guest]: many traditional economic factors must enter, I think, you know, so, but, you know, academic
[Guest]: disciplines are vast.
[Guest]: And there have always been, not just now, there have always been different points of
[Guest]: view, controversial conclusions, people disagreeing with each other on the same thing, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I think that's healthy.
[Amit Varma]: And within, you know, you mentioned humility, being open to nuance, and especially being
[Amit Varma]: open to the notion that a fashionable explanation, or the conventional explanation may be wrong.
[Amit Varma]: Just look at the data, make sure the data is as good and as generated with as much intellectual
[Amit Varma]: honesty as you can manage, and then see where it takes you.
[Amit Varma]: Now, is there a problem in academia also, that there are these fashions in academia,
[Amit Varma]: there are these conventions, people think in certain ideological ways through certain
[Amit Varma]: prisms.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, the temptation for a young academic looking to move up within the profession
[Amit Varma]: is to conform to those or at least not be too much of an outlier.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Not just ideological, but even methods, you know, so methods become fashionable.
[Guest]: You know, so if a particular method is fashionable, everybody wants to just join the bandwagon,
[Guest]: because then you feel, oh, my paper is more likely to be published, because if I do this
[Guest]: or that, or if I work on this field or that, you know, so fields become fashionable, methods
[Guest]: become fashionable, ideologies become fashionable, you know, and the, I guess, because I'm being
[Guest]: a little bit of an outlier, almost in every field, it hasn't bothered me personally that
[Guest]: much.
[Guest]: Because I think this is, again, a legacy of my father, where he belonged and didn't belong
[Guest]: to any one, any one field or ideology, you know.
[Guest]: So the right wing thought of him as too leftist, the left wing thought of him as not left enough,
[Guest]: you know, so and so thought of him as not this way, not that way.
[Guest]: So he sort of didn't really belong to any club.
[Guest]: And I, when I think about myself, I sort of feel that way, a little bit, which is, I'm
[Guest]: a little bit of an outlier, you know, on this.
[Guest]: So I haven't gone on this high track publishing, you know, that career path or whatever.
[Guest]: So I'm a little unencumbered by this.
[Guest]: Of course, it has its own downsides, and it has its own risks.
[Guest]: But you know, I enjoy doing what I do.
[Guest]: And I'm, you know, from my mother, I've learned not to be self conscious, you know, you do
[Guest]: what you what you believe in doing kind of a thing.
[Guest]: But it's hard.
[Guest]: It's really hard for, because I see young people now, they're so career oriented, literally
[Guest]: from the day they joined the PhD program.
[Guest]: So who you will sit with in a at a conference table, you know, they will, and I don't blame
[Guest]: them.
[Guest]: Because that's the way you know, it's like, you go to a conference, you suss out who's
[Guest]: there, you know, etc, etc.
[Guest]: You choose sessions you choose, you know, and it may be happening unconsciously, not
[Guest]: that people are planning it that way actively.
[Guest]: But building networks doing you know, sort of it's fine, you know, I feel like I'm, I've
[Guest]: escaped all that.
[Guest]: And now I'm on the other side of 50.
[Guest]: So you know, now it doesn't matter anyway.
[Guest]: But it's like, I feel like I've done what I what has excited me.
[Guest]: And as a result, it's, it's a body of work.
[Guest]: You know, I wouldn't say, you know, there's this one paper that I did, which has been
[Guest]: in AER or Econometrica, and it's changed the way the discipline has worked.
[Guest]: Obviously not, nothing like that.
[Guest]: But it's a body of work.
[Guest]: And I feel that that body of work I have enjoyed doing, whether it's made any difference to
[Guest]: anyone is not for me to say, but I have enjoyed doing it.
[Guest]: And it's sort of coming together, you know, in this way of role of social identity, when
[Guest]: you move away from an individual to a group, you know, how does that work in an economic
[Guest]: setting?
[Guest]: So it's that larger field and I, you know, and so affirmative, all of that falls in the
[Guest]: same sort of broad, these are complicated issues.
[Guest]: These are controversial issues.
[Guest]: There are no clear answers.
[Guest]: I don't have clear answers.
[Guest]: But I think that these are exciting problems.
[Guest]: And precisely because they are nuanced, I enjoy doing it because I, I like the challenge
[Guest]: of nuance.
[Guest]: You know, when you when you are unable to say something with certainty that this is
[Guest]: it, I found a, you know, magical solution to this problem, which I guess from a careerist
[Guest]: point of view is not the greatest thing, but it's fine.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and you know, what you say about both your father and yourself that you never belonged
[Amit Varma]: in this or that is resonant with me as well, because I've always kind of felt that in any
[Amit Varma]: domain that I've been in, I'm not mainstream and the elites don't want me at the table.
[Amit Varma]: But now I feel now that it makes two of us, maybe the horror we do belong somewhere.
[Unknown]: It's a club of two.
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to resist that and say no, no.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, one of my dear friends, Ajay Shah, often talks about, laments about, laments
[Amit Varma]: the fact that a lot of economists, and I think this would apply to people in any academic
[Amit Varma]: field, especially in the humanities, a lot of economists start playing that academic
[Amit Varma]: game where they get trapped in what is essentially an academic circle jerk, and that's my term,
[Amit Varma]: not his, where, you know, they are signaling to each other, writing for each other and
[Amit Varma]: it's a circular game, they have to publish so much, these are the journals where they
[Amit Varma]: publish, you know, he got tenure, he became a professor, and it's this whole game and
[Amit Varma]: they don't engage enough with the real world.
[Amit Varma]: And as someone who has engaged a lot with the real world in policy domains, and so on,
[Amit Varma]: Ajay's lament is that I wish there were more brilliant people who actually did this, you
[Amit Varma]: know, he sort of talks about so much talent being wasted, because you're trapped inside
[Amit Varma]: this little game, and you're not really kind of engaging with the real world.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, you've also bucked the trend of being there, like just a very fact that
[Amit Varma]: you taught the economics of discrimination in the early 2000s.
[Amit Varma]: Whenever you started the course, the economists aren't doing that the sociologists don't want
[Amit Varma]: you to teach that everybody is like, what the hell?
[Amit Varma]: So you're clearly you know, you're kind of bucking that trend.
[Amit Varma]: So one, do you think that, you know, this is a problem with academia that people can
[Amit Varma]: become the prisoners of domains that they can enter these silos, silos of specialization
[Amit Varma]: and kind of get trapped in that and just play that game all their lives.
[Amit Varma]: And if you were to advise sort of young people, maybe young academics, maybe people thinking
[Amit Varma]: of a scholarly career, you know, what would you say?
[Guest]: I think all careers have their own compulsions, you know, I wouldn't say only academics has
[Guest]: it, you know, I mean, you're training to be a cricket player, you know, you have to, there
[Guest]: are certain ropes you have to, you have to learn, you have to climb, you know, things
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: So succeeding in a career has its own demands.
[Guest]: And I wouldn't blame anyone for following the dictates of that demand.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, if you have to publish in quality journals, you have to publish in quality
[Guest]: journals.
[Guest]: I mean, that's the requirement of the profession.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but the point is, cricketers are judged on how well they score in front of packed
[Amit Varma]: stadiums, right?
[Guest]: So they're not performing in the nets in front of a committee of experts.
[Guest]: So cricket was a bad example.
[Guest]: But what I'm trying to say is that what it takes to succeed in a particular field, you
[Guest]: broadly know that, and then you have to follow some of those, the sort of the set pathways.
[Guest]: And breaking free is, you know, from a career point, unless you just change careers, or
[Guest]: you are, you know, it's also a question of privilege.
[Guest]: I mean, the thing is that if you have inherited money, you have legacy, you know, you can
[Guest]: say, okay, I'm going to just discover myself and, you know, one year, I'll just play jazz
[Guest]: music.
[Guest]: Another year, I'm just going to, you know, make films on my iPhone or whatever.
[Guest]: But that's because somebody is paying for my bread and butter.
[Guest]: Now, that's a very, very privileged position.
[Guest]: But if you have to earn a bread and butter, and if you have to publish in an academic
[Guest]: institution, then there are certain demands that that institution places, whether those
[Guest]: demands are valid or not is in a different conversation.
[Guest]: But as long as there are some rules of the game, in order to succeed at that game, you
[Guest]: have to follow the rules of the game.
[Guest]: You can always be in the policy world, you know, but there you can make the other point,
[Guest]: which is that the policy world also needs to engage with high quality evidence, right?
[Guest]: And so how do you make the two meet?
[Guest]: And for very young researchers, it'll be hard, I think, those who are in academics, those
[Guest]: who won't go into policy, etc, that's a different story, but I guess, there comes a time for
[Guest]: many economists, when especially, you know, 50 plus, that you willy nilly starting it,
[Guest]: some people do it more actively, some people do it less.
[Guest]: But if you're working on issues that are policy, amenable to policy implications, or actionable
[Guest]: policy, then you start sort of engaging with the policy world as well.
[Amit Varma]: What do you feel about the inevitable trade off that we're all confronted with, between
[Amit Varma]: breadth and depth?
[Amit Varma]: Like on the one hand, there is a temptation to pick one subject, and just go really deep
[Amit Varma]: into that.
[Amit Varma]: And there is enormous value in that, because you might end up going deeper than anyone
[Amit Varma]: else has gone, and, you know, completely figure out that subject really deeply.
[Amit Varma]: The danger in that, of course, is you could pick an obscure subject, like, you know, cereal
[Amit Varma]: prices in Mexico in 1830.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, it has no resonance, it doesn't, there's nothing there.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, there is a temptation to go broad, that apply frameworks from, say,
[Amit Varma]: different disciplines, or even within your own discipline, just keep it broad, build
[Amit Varma]: broad narratives, or try to come up with grand theories that explain things and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And both of these have the danger, the danger in going too deep is that you're not seeing
[Amit Varma]: enough of the big picture.
[Amit Varma]: The danger in only trying for the big picture can mean that you, you get everything wrong,
[Amit Varma]: because you don't get any of the detail as any specialist could tell you.
[Amit Varma]: So how does one sort of manage that trade off, because they're both appealing, and you
[Amit Varma]: could argue that you actually can appeal to more people and get in television studios
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, by just taking the broad kind of view, you know, and, I mean, at some
[Amit Varma]: point, you need to be broad at some point, you need to be deep, how do you manage these
[Guest]: tensions?
[Guest]: It's hard, but I think on balance, if I had to give a very short answer, my view would
[Guest]: be that whatever it is that you say, shouldn't be wrong.
[Guest]: So if by being broad, you're saying wrong things, I'll say don't be broad.
[Amit Varma]: If by going deep, you're saying wrong things, don't go deep.
[Amit Varma]: I guess without a specific example in my mind, sometimes you can go broad not by being wrong,
[Guest]: but by not being nuanced enough.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So that's what I'm saying.
[Guest]: If somebody like you take a very popular author, like best selling author, like Harari, you
[Guest]: all know Harari.
[Guest]: Now, we've all read his books, I mean, I haven't read all of them, but I've read some things,
[Guest]: and very impressive, very, very nicely written, etc.
[Guest]: There's millions of copies all over the world.
[Guest]: Now I recently read an article, which is a critique of Harari and how he's glossed over
[Guest]: some of the nuance to the point of getting it wrong.
[Guest]: So one of the dangers of glossing over nuance is that you could end up saying the wrong
[Guest]: thing.
[Guest]: So I guess my short answer to this would be to not achieve for such a big picture that
[Guest]: you're just getting everything wrong.
[Guest]: So have a sense of the context, but then go deep into it.
[Guest]: You know, so for example, if you're studying, I don't know, the caste system in India, right?
[Guest]: Now when I started, I literally, you know, I knew some things from my personal life,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: But I hadn't studied the caste system because social science was never my domain, you know,
[Guest]: I'd always been a science student.
[Guest]: And I never read nonfiction in social science, because that was never my, I didn't, I didn't
[Guest]: think that I was going to go down that way.
[Guest]: And so knowing about personal episodes of caste and one's own brush with the caste system
[Guest]: in different ways, a totally different thing from knowing what the hell this whole thing
[Guest]: is about.
[Guest]: And so I found the broader readings, books that my father suggested to me at that time,
[Guest]: extremely useful.
[Guest]: None of it is in the papers that I've written, but reading those was extremely useful for
[Guest]: me to just situate the whole thing.
[Guest]: And even now, every now and then, I really miss my father, because every now and then
[Guest]: I literally want to call him up and say, Baba, I want a reading on this particular aspect.
[Guest]: And of course, he's not there any longer.
[Guest]: So I have to just Google and find things on my own.
[Guest]: But again, you know, the point that I said about humility is important is because if
[Guest]: I had begun by thinking that, okay, I'm, you know, God's gift to humanity on the caste
[Guest]: question.
[Guest]: And I'm going to unveil answers that no scholar before me has ever done.
[Guest]: And you know, I'm this very smart person who's now going to tell everybody else, okay, here's
[Guest]: what you guys don't know about caste and I'm telling you this.
[Guest]: If I had gone into it with that approach, I don't think it would have worked at all.
[Guest]: I was bound to get, I mean, not that I know a lot now, but I'm still learning and literally
[Guest]: I learn every day.
[Guest]: And because I see myself as a student of this field rather than as an expert, it always
[Guest]: helps me because when I read something new, I say, oh, right, this is it.
[Guest]: You know, and in this, you know, this is the history, something like that, you know.
[Guest]: And that adds up to then finally start becoming a big picture.
[Guest]: So you go in depth.
[Guest]: In order to go in depth, you learn little bits every time.
[Guest]: And then it adds up to a big picture.
[Guest]: So I would say if you're working on something for the first time, maybe take the depth approach
[Guest]: first, do a little bit of in-depth pieces, then sit back and say, okay, I've done five
[Guest]: deep dives.
[Guest]: How is this picture adding up?
[Guest]: Which part, how many pieces of the jigsaw have I connected?
[Guest]: Not all, but some.
[Guest]: So now a little bit of the picture is emerging rather than saying, okay, now I'm just looking
[Guest]: at you guys from the sky and I can just see the whole picture.
[Guest]: I think that's the problem.
[Guest]: And many people fall prey to that, to that tendency, which is that I am looking at you
[Guest]: from the sky and I can see something that you can't because you are in the picture.
[Guest]: I'm on top, I'm taking an aerial view and I see everything.
[Guest]: And so I'm explaining it to you now, something that you can't see, that's where things start
[Guest]: to go wrong.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I think there's this human danger also of look, how do we understand the world by
[Amit Varma]: telling stories about the world to ourselves?
[Amit Varma]: And this is tempting and, you know, it leads to a certain amount of comfort if we can tell
[Amit Varma]: a story about something that explains it to us.
[Amit Varma]: So a lot of stories tend to be stories that are too simple and often stories that are
[Amit Varma]: wrong like religion.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, so I completely agree with you that it makes sense to go for depth, some
[Amit Varma]: depth before breadth.
[Amit Varma]: The other, I love your jigsaw puzzle metaphor and the other one that I bring in is that
[Amit Varma]: when you paint a picture by joining dots, and the thing is, if you don't have enough
[Amit Varma]: dots, exactly, then you know, a horse can appear to be a chair, right?
[Amit Varma]: You need enough dots to have a sense of what you're painting a picture of and the more
[Amit Varma]: dots you have, the more accurate they will be.
[Amit Varma]: And the question for a scholar also will be what if you're trying to paint a picture of
[Amit Varma]: 10 different things, and you don't feel like you have the, you know, can fill enough dots
[Amit Varma]: in each of them.
[Amit Varma]: And there's there's a term called Gelman amnesia, have you heard of it?
[Amit Varma]: No.
[Amit Varma]: So it's named after the physicist Murray Gelman, who once made the observation that when you
[Amit Varma]: read a newspaper, and there's an article on a subject that you know a lot about, you read
[Amit Varma]: that article, and you realize it's full of shit, right, they got it wrong.
[Amit Varma]: But when you read everything else in the newspaper about things that you don't know anything
[Amit Varma]: about, you assume that it is correct.
[Amit Varma]: So that's Gelman amnesia, you forget that they got that wrong.
[Amit Varma]: And I feel that with scholars who are too broad, it can seem like this, that when somebody
[Amit Varma]: like a Harari, and he was actually the name I had in mind before you mentioned that when
[Amit Varma]: someone like a Harari tells these beautiful stories that explain everything, I'm like,
[Amit Varma]: yeah, man, it explains everything.
[Amit Varma]: But if he happens to write about a subject I know, I'll be like, wait a minute, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So okay, so a final question about sort of academics and the academic journey before
[Amit Varma]: we dive into both caste and gender, which I want to do, because your work is both so
[Amit Varma]: detailed and so important.
[Amit Varma]: One of my guests, I forget who was, you know, use a metaphor of the Indian civil services
[Amit Varma]: to talk about how there will be people who you know, for those who don't know, you give
[Amit Varma]: the UPSC exam.
[Amit Varma]: And depending on your rank, you get, you know, Foreign Service or IAS or IPS and the lower
[Amit Varma]: services and this guest, I think it was, you know, Mahima Vashisht in a recent episode
[Amit Varma]: who's been a civil servant, made the point about how so many of us seniors in one of
[Amit Varma]: the lesser civil services, so to say, would have this resentment, ki yaar, agar mujhe
[Amit Varma]: UPSC mein doh mark zyada milte is subject mein, toh aaj main London mein Indian Foreign
[Amit Varma]: Services mein hota.
[Amit Varma]: And the tragedy and the injustice of that system is that an exam you give sometime in
[Amit Varma]: your early 20s determines where you land up at age 59.
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: So it is almost like that one event just sort of changes everything.
[Amit Varma]: Now, in an academic sense, it strikes me that a lot of what happens is also sort of happenstance
[Amit Varma]: like that.
[Amit Varma]: Like which universe, which foreign university do you happen to go through?
[Amit Varma]: Do you happen to make it to a foreign university in the first place?
[Amit Varma]: You know, who is your advisor there?
[Amit Varma]: Some people can get lucky to get a good PhD advisor, some get a bad one, where do you
[Amit Varma]: subsequently work?
[Amit Varma]: And anywhere along the journey, it can fall apart.
[Amit Varma]: And often it strikes me that this starting point can be something incredibly unfair.
[Amit Varma]: This starting point can be ki theek hai, you know, your parents weren't well, you had to
[Amit Varma]: be in India to look after them, aap abroad jaani paay, financial circumstances nahi the,
[Amit Varma]: aapne yahi pe kuch kar liya locally, or no matter how brilliant you were, you are always
[Amit Varma]: looked upon as lower on the ladder than somebody who had the benefit of a better education.
[Amit Varma]: That's one aspect of it.
[Amit Varma]: Another aspect of it is that you could be an Indian scholar, who knows a subject in
[Amit Varma]: great detail, whose work has rigor, nuance, everything, but somebody from some foreigner
[Amit Varma]: from a foreign university will come and turn their orientalist gaze on your subject and
[Amit Varma]: mouth wake general generalities and you know, say banal things, sometimes you're wrong,
[Amit Varma]: sometimes you're right with what's a big deal.
[Amit Varma]: And, and they get all the media attention and the book deals and everything and you
[Unknown]: are like, what the fuck, you know, I've worked all my life on this shit.
[Amit Varma]: So what do you sort of feel about this?
[Amit Varma]: Because I meet a lot of brilliant academics who are not big names, who are not there on
[Amit Varma]: the ladder, right?
[Amit Varma]: And I and vice versa, right?
[Amit Varma]: So what do you feel about this?
[Amit Varma]: And how, you know, how does one then deal with that resentment?
[Amit Varma]: Or how does one come to terms with ki theek hai jo hai so hai?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So I didn't go abroad for my PhD for personal reasons, and there is a, I got, I got a super
[Guest]: fantastic advisor in the form of Kaushik Basu, who was at that time at the Delhi school.
[Guest]: So I really enjoyed my PhD with him.
[Guest]: So no regrets at all on that front at all.
[Guest]: Zero regrets.
[Guest]: However,
[Guest]: So my question was generally,
[Guest]: So the American system, because of the rigors of coursework, you know, every PhD student
[Guest]: has to do two years of coursework.
[Guest]: So it just puts you through the grinder in a way that Indian institutions don't do, right?
[Guest]: And so you come out on the other side of the grinder in this process form, which is a disadvantage
[Guest]: for those of us who did our PhD in India, because we were not put through that kind
[Guest]: of a grinder.
[Guest]: I got lucky because I had a fantastic advisor, and it was really nice.
[Guest]: And it's absolutely true that in India, not having a foreign degree is a big disadvantage,
[Guest]: you know, within your colleagues and just in the circuit.
[Guest]: And even within the US, there are, you know, whether you're in the top 10 universities
[Guest]: or not, etc.
[Guest]: There are all of these issues.
[Guest]: But certainly, if you've done your PhD from India versus somebody who's done it from the
[Guest]: UK or the USA, there, you know, there is an issue.
[Guest]: And at the time when I was a student at the Delhi School, you know, about eight to 10
[Guest]: people out of hundred class of 150 used to get first divisions.
[Guest]: So first division was the big thing, by the way, those days.
[Guest]: And in my batch, it was eight, eight of us who got a first division and seven went abroad
[Guest]: and I didn't go, you know, so that's how much of an outlier I was even then.
[Guest]: And so it's a struggle and there are, it's hard, there are and I'm sure that others who
[Guest]: are in my situation also have faced them at different points, there are frustrations,
[Guest]: you get upset sometimes that, oh, you know, somebody just walks away with the limelight
[Guest]: and all that, all that.
[Guest]: But again, you know, as you've discovered in your conversations with me, I'm a little
[Guest]: chilled out in these matters.
[Guest]: So there can be a temporary irritation, but it passes very soon.
[Guest]: But I have to mention that by the time I came to Ashoka, you know, it's been very different.
[Guest]: Ashoka is really, is very respectful towards the body of work, you know, and I've received
[Guest]: huge amounts of love and, you know, support within Ashoka, so from everyone.
[Guest]: And so I feel really happy about that.
[Guest]: But it's not, there is a disadvantage and this thing of, you know, I will tell you what
[Guest]: you're missing in two sentences or three sentences, this tendency is there.
[Guest]: This will, I don't think you can, you know, there is a, there are many hierarchies.
[Guest]: So within India, there are hierarchies of class and urban location and English education
[Guest]: versus not caste, of course, you know, but then there are international hierarchies,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Where race plays a factor, where academic location plays a factor, right?
[Guest]: So obviously Harvard in the US will rank number one in any of this hierarchy and so on.
[Guest]: So and things like that, right?
[Guest]: So institutions have brand names and they really make a difference.
[Guest]: So an affiliation with a very top branded university department will open doors in a
[Guest]: way that a lower branded university department, it won't.
[Guest]: So once you step outside India, you realize that there are these other hierarchies that
[Guest]: play it well.
[Guest]: But that's life, you know, there's no point in lamenting them and just feeling, you know,
[Guest]: say, oh, and there's also, I don't think these hierarchies should be used as an excuse to
[Guest]: say, oh, the reason I'm really not publishing is because there are all these hierarchies
[Guest]: and I can't work.
[Guest]: No, sorry, there are hierarchies, that's the world, that's the real world, deal with it,
[Guest]: you know.
[Guest]: So I will keep publishing, I will keep writing.
[Guest]: If somebody else saying, oh, she didn't go abroad for a PhD, so I don't think her work
[Guest]: is good.
[Guest]: That's fine.
[Guest]: They are entitled to their opinion.
[Guest]: But I would say engage with my work, not where I got my degree from.
[Guest]: If there's anything wrong with my work, point that out, I'm happy to engage.
[Guest]: But don't, you know, pedigree is, I mean, it's very funny, we lament about the caste
[Guest]: system in India, but we are very pedigree conscious.
[Guest]: So that's, you know, what data does it make, do the work, don't look at my CV and say,
[Guest]: oh, she did her PhD from D school, oh, that's bad, you know, why?
[Guest]: So one has to, I mean, what I'll say to younger people is that if you are working in a good
[Guest]: Indian institution, doing your PhD, you know, steel yourself against these tendencies because
[Guest]: they are there.
[Guest]: But discrimination is a fact of life, you know, sometimes we are on the side of, sometimes
[Guest]: our social identities protect us from that discrimination, which is when we feel great.
[Guest]: But there are sometimes our social identities, in another context, we become the victims
[Guest]: of discrimination.
[Guest]: But then we have to figure out, you know, we can't make that as an excuse as academics
[Guest]: to say, okay, I'm not going to publish anymore because somebody said that, oh, our Indian
[Guest]: degrees are not good enough, no, why?
[Guest]: That has never deterred me from doing what I think is right.
[Guest]: And I don't think it should deter anyone else too.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the lessons I learned from poker was don't sweat what you can't control.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: You know, what you can't control is what you do, what you can't control is the process,
[Amit Varma]: what you can't control is the attitude you bring to your work.
[Amit Varma]: And that's what really matters.
[Amit Varma]: Don't sweat the rest of it.
[Guest]: I mean, there have been many situations where, you know, for example, I've gone to an institution
[Guest]: and asked for data and I've been told, no, you can't get this data.
[Guest]: And the next thing I know is some researcher from X, Y, Z university with the right color
[Guest]: of the skin has got that data.
[Guest]: I said, what man, when I wrote you a proper letter, what happened, you know, you know,
[Guest]: anger comes, it definitely comes.
[Guest]: But then, you know, it's one of those things, I mean, life is unfair sometimes.
[Guest]: So how do you deal with that?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you know, how do you deal with that unfairness?
[Amit Varma]: Talking about the unfairness of life, let's, you know, move to the subject of something
[Amit Varma]: that you've studied deeply for decades, almost, I don't know if one could call it decades
[Unknown]: in the plural.
[Guest]: But yeah, I guess you started with caste in the late 90s, so decades here, 98, 98, decades.
[Amit Varma]: So what were the big questions about caste that animated you when you started working
[Amit Varma]: on it?
[Amit Varma]: And you've already described your first paper and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And how did those questions evolve and change?
[Guest]: So the only question that started this whole journey was, I mean, the question was phrased
[Guest]: in the sense of have the gaps between Dalits and Apakas narrowed?
[Guest]: Of course, the first paper was not about narrowing, because it was one point in time.
[Guest]: But the question was, are they significant?
[Guest]: Are they across different indicators?
[Guest]: And are they across states?
[Guest]: That was the first question.
[Guest]: Basically, it was like taking stock of the material disparities between Apakas and Dalits.
[Guest]: That was what the question was about.
[Guest]: Because there's been a lot of sociological, ethnographic, village study kind of literature
[Guest]: that talked about power that comes from being used as vote banks, you know, dominant caste
[Guest]: that may not necessarily be the Apakas, you know, middle caste being dominant caste, you
[Guest]: know, some caste that got classified as OBCs.
[Guest]: But even some Dalit caste, for example, could become dominant caste in their villages.
[Guest]: And there's a lot of churning.
[Guest]: Then there was the 72nd and 73rd, 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendment, where local
[Guest]: bodies were given, you know, reservation, etc.
[Guest]: So all of that is sort of churning, there's been a churning and there is a rise in representation
[Guest]: of Dalits at the local panchayat level, state election, reserve constituencies, chief ministers
[Guest]: of states or important ministers in different governments, etc.
[Guest]: All of that might have led to, you know, sort of narrow gaps or insignificant gaps or that
[Guest]: the persistent disparity may not be a picture of India at that time.
[Guest]: And so what the first paper did was just said, no, it is, right?
[Guest]: Now why is it?
[Guest]: Why is it that despite all of these things, these things didn't change, etc.
[Guest]: Then that started the journey, right?
[Guest]: And then I had to read about dominant caste, I had to read about, you know, what is OBC.
[Guest]: So I remember a discussion with my father where I said, I don't understand the controversy
[Guest]: about the OBC reservation.
[Guest]: Why is it that some, you know, people object to some castes being included, but not to
[Guest]: other castes?
[Guest]: What is this whole thing?
[Guest]: So he patiently explained to me the difference between Varna and Jati, which I had read about,
[Guest]: but I had not internalized it.
[Guest]: And I didn't understand the connection between that distinction and the OBC reservation controversy,
[Guest]: which she then, you know, verbally explained to me, then he gave me references to read.
[Guest]: And that sort of started the thing, and then with my co-author, Rajesh Ramachandran, who
[Guest]: used to be my student in Delhi school, but kept in touch, and now we have many papers
[Guest]: together.
[Guest]: So we've developed this sort of agenda where we've looked at change over time, we've looked
[Guest]: at early childhood, we've looked at education, we've looked at stunting, etc, etc.
[Guest]: So you know, we just, we finish one paper and we start the next, you know.
[Guest]: So now we have a result that talks about the effect of untouchability, which is illegal,
[Guest]: but prevalent on early childhood outcomes for Dalit children.
[Guest]: And so it's like an onion that the more you peel, you know, you discover new things about
[Guest]: the system.
[Guest]: And with this early childhood and untouchability research, I have realized, I think, for the
[Guest]: first time with clarity, why the gaps are persistent.
[Guest]: Because if the disparity is starting at early childhood, then by the time these children
[Guest]: become adults, you know, it's the same system that's getting perpetuated.
[Guest]: So another argument made about the caste system is that it's a hangover of the past, or it
[Guest]: is a rural phenomenon.
[Guest]: In urban India, how do you know?
[Guest]: Aapki caste, meri caste, kya pata kisi ko?
[Guest]: So urban India mein caste disparity nahi hota.
[Guest]: Yeh purane zamane mein discrimination hota tha, ussi ka hangover we are seeing today,
[Guest]: you know.
[Guest]: So all of these questions you can actually examine empirically, and you realize that
[Guest]: it's being perpetuated, the discrimination based upon caste identity is salient and discrimination
[Guest]: based upon that continues today.
[Amit Varma]: So take me through some of these questions, for example, the question of past discrimination
[Amit Varma]: and versus present discrimination.
[Amit Varma]: How do you disentangle that?
[Amit Varma]: For example, an argument was made, which you've kind of busted through the various studies,
[Amit Varma]: and we can go into the weeds of some of that, you know, arguments are sometimes made ki
[Amit Varma]: hai, you know, labor market mein discrimination nahi hai, kyuki maybe there is discrimination
[Amit Varma]: earlier, which happens because of, you know, people are born in poor families, or they
[Amit Varma]: don't get the same kind of education and all that.
[Amit Varma]: So they are distinctly unequal by the time they reach the labor market.
[Amit Varma]: But labor markets are different.
[Amit Varma]: And your study showed that no, that is really not the case at all.
[Amit Varma]: Labor markets also discriminate.
[Amit Varma]: For example, I'm just taking like one of the big questions that you've asked.
[Amit Varma]: So take me through, you know, how you then start disentangling all the other possible
[Amit Varma]: causes for you know, all the other possible explanations for income disparities at the
[Amit Varma]: labor market.
[Amit Varma]: And how do you then arrive at the fact that yes, discrimination has taken place does take
[Amit Varma]: place.
[Amit Varma]: And these are the kind of mechanics of it.
[Amit Varma]: So take me through some of these studies, because I found it really fascinating.
[Guest]: So there is absolutely no doubt that in if you look at the early childhood and pre labor
[Guest]: market conditions between upper caste and Dalits on average, there are huge gaps.
[Guest]: So by the time individuals enter the labor market, they are already very different in
[Guest]: terms of the skill set in terms of abilities.
[Guest]: And all that has got to do with social capital, with the background, networks, etc, etc, right?
[Guest]: Now, the question is, does the labor market perpetuate that discrimination or not?
[Guest]: So a very simple study, which is not authored by me, but it was a part of the project that
[Guest]: I was a part of, I did a college to work study.
[Guest]: And this particular study, it's a very famous paper in the AER done for the US by Marianne
[Guest]: Bertrand and Sendhil Mullainathan, which the title of that paper is called are Emily and
[Guest]: Greg more employable than Lakisha and Jamal, Lakisha and Jamal, all right.
[Guest]: What they do is they send resumes to employers, these are called correspondence studies.
[Guest]: And that those resumes control for everything, not just academics course, but extracurriculars
[Guest]: as well.
[Guest]: All the, you know, debating, confidence, kind of all the signals that employers look for.
[Guest]: The only difference.
[Guest]: So these are matched resumes.
[Guest]: The only difference is the names are different.
[Guest]: So black sounding names and white sounding names, and the callback that white sounding
[Guest]: names get are far higher than the callbacks than black sounding names get.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Diva Pager, a sociologist in the US who died tragically young, she did an even more remarkable
[Guest]: study where she said, okay, the reason that blacks might be getting lower callbacks is
[Guest]: because there's a stigma of criminality, you know, because incarceration rates for African
[Guest]: Americans are far higher than those for whites.
[Guest]: So employers might be reluctant to hire blacks because it's, it's a thing in their mind that,
[Guest]: you know, we don't want anybody with a criminal background, etc.
[Guest]: So in her study, she gave the, these are all experimental subjects.
[Guest]: So she gave the white person a criminal record, that white job applicant has actually served
[Guest]: time in jail, a convicted felon, and the black applicant is not a convicted felon.
[Guest]: So she attached the, because these are fake resumes, so she attached the stigma of criminality
[Guest]: to whites.
[Guest]: And her experiment shows that attaching the stigma of criminality to whites lowers the
[Guest]: callback for whites compared to when they were not shown as being felons.
[Guest]: But a white with a criminal record is still likely to get higher callbacks compared to
[Guest]: black with no criminal record.
[Guest]: If this doesn't show discrimination, because this controls for everything, this controls
[Amit Varma]: for everything, right.
[Guest]: And there are studies that have been done of this kind for India as well.
[Guest]: And we did a project for paper, Delhi and Chennai, yeah, and you see the same thing.
[Guest]: So you can say, and this is before the interview, so you're not even judging based upon looking
[Guest]: at the person and forming some impressions, right.
[Guest]: So stereotypes and the association of, you know, the negative stereotypes about Dalits,
[Guest]: the stigma of incompetence, that does play a role, right.
[Guest]: And so how do you disentangle?
[Guest]: So one state way to do is to correspond in studies.
[Guest]: The other when you're looking at data, you of course, you control for all the ability
[Guest]: related indicators, and then you see whether there's an extra wage penalty.
[Guest]: What you call decomposition.
[Guest]: Decomposition.
[Guest]: So you can, there's a method where you can add in all the variables that will explain
[Guest]: the wage gap and see whether the wage gap gets artificially eliminated.
[Guest]: And if it doesn't, then that is due, that's an unexplained part of the wage gap.
[Guest]: Now, you can argue whether it's all discrimination or not, and the jury is open on that one.
[Guest]: But certainly a part of it is discriminatory.
[Guest]: And that's the point where I'm saying is look elsewhere.
[Guest]: So you have an unobserved wage gap, which is your data is showing you.
[Guest]: Now read accounts.
[Guest]: You know, so a question that I often get asked in interviews is, how long are we going to
[Guest]: have this reservation system?
[Guest]: It's time to end it.
[Guest]: You know, and my answer is, let's go for one month where there is no story of caste atrocities
[Guest]: reported from anywhere in the country.
[Guest]: The day we have one month free of caste atrocities, let's end reservation then.
[Amit Varma]: So I found these studies interesting because the Delhi study, for example, sent fake resumes,
[Amit Varma]: looked at English newspapers.
[Amit Varma]: So you're already controlling for English and you send fake resumes with stereotypical
[Amit Varma]: last names to a whole bunch of employers.
[Amit Varma]: And the conclusion was that Dalits are two third less likely as upper class people to
[Amit Varma]: get a call back.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, everybody would assume that they were less likely, but two thirds less likely is
[Amit Varma]: a good way to kind of quantify it and understand the problem.
[Amit Varma]: And the Chennai study was fascinating because it also looked at gender and it found that
[Amit Varma]: low caste females were the least likely of all to get a call back, which is, of course,
[Amit Varma]: not surprising either.
[Amit Varma]: What I found also interesting was that when you, you know, use the decomposition techniques,
[Amit Varma]: you're also thinking of endowment differences.
[Amit Varma]: Now endowment differences, of course, is that because of discrimination of the past or because
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, what their backgrounds might have been, Dalits are more likely to be poor,
[Amit Varma]: more likely to have a worse education and so on and so forth, they end up in the job
[Amit Varma]: market with, you know, that disadvantage built in and that's the endowment difference.
[Amit Varma]: And you point out that that's actually narrowing in urban populations.
[Amit Varma]: And you're honest enough to say that it may be affirmative action, which is responsible,
[Amit Varma]: but it may not be because it's again, the swimming pool thing, we can't really tell.
[Amit Varma]: Has it been your experience that, like, here's the thing, as far as the rural-urban divide
[Amit Varma]: is concerned, Ambedkar, of course, famously said, what is a village but a sink of localism,
[Amit Varma]: a den of ignorance, narrow mindedness and communalism, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And one would assume from various different directions, that caste would be a far bigger
[Amit Varma]: problem in rural areas and in urban areas.
[Amit Varma]: And one reason for that would just be that the incentives are different in urban areas.
[Amit Varma]: You want to be part of wider economic networks, there is more competition.
[Amit Varma]: So perhaps you can't, you know, the cost of discrimination goes up, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: At the same time, if affirmative action was working, you'd expect to see a result of that
[Amit Varma]: in, you know, in being less of a factor in urban areas as well.
[Amit Varma]: So is it generally true that whatever the causes might be, that in general, urban areas
[Amit Varma]: are slightly better or, you know, what's the scene there?
[Guest]: It's hard to say.
[Guest]: So one is, you know, one difference between rural and urban is that it's harder to identify
[Guest]: caste on casual interaction in urban compared to rural because not all last names are caste
[Guest]: indicative.
[Guest]: Also, you take the bit metros, you know, people are coming from different parts of the country
[Guest]: and people don't easily recognize the caste names, even if they were indicative of caste.
[Guest]: But my paper with Catherine Newman, where we do this college to work tracking study,
[Guest]: we track students for two years, every six months, we were interviewing them.
[Guest]: And we asked them what, how their job interviews went, particularly in the private sector where
[Guest]: there's no reservation.
[Guest]: So there's no place on the form or anything that you are required to declare your caste.
[Guest]: And almost every student that we talked to said that the one of the first questions,
[Guest]: if not the first question that they were asked was, what is your family background?
[Guest]: When I first started transcribing interviews and sending them to Catherine for reading,
[Guest]: she called me from the US and said, there must be a mistake.
[Guest]: So I said, no, why?
[Guest]: She said, listen to it again.
[Guest]: So I said, I was there.
[Guest]: What do you mean, listen to it again?
[Guest]: But I will.
[Guest]: And so I listened to it again.
[Guest]: And there was no mistake because I was, you know, there in the interview.
[Guest]: So she said that in the United States, this question could never be asked because it is
[Guest]: about individual merit and ability.
[Guest]: The family background is irrelevant, right?
[Guest]: But in India, it is a very common assumption to think that the family is a crucible of
[Guest]: merit, of individual merit.
[Guest]: So you immediately conflate family circumstances with the individual's merit.
[Guest]: That is not only caste.
[Guest]: We are not saying that in the paper, but caste plays a very big role in it, right?
[Guest]: And so in an urban setting where you think caste might not matter, first, this is one
[Guest]: mechanism through which employers try to gauge where you're situated.
[Guest]: The second thing is when they see some obvious class markers, which they believe, we don't
[Guest]: know where this person is.
[Guest]: So they'll say, what is your view about the reservation policy?
[Guest]: Now this policy doesn't apply to the private sector.
[Guest]: They have no business asking this question because there could be my views about anything.
[Guest]: What do I feel about Shah Rukh Khan or, you know, Hrithik Roshan for that matter?
[Amit Varma]: That's irrelevant to the job interview.
[Amit Varma]: Which would be a good question.
[Guest]: Ask someone what do you feel about Shah Rukh Khan?
[Guest]: If they say they like Shah Rukh Khan, okay, reject.
[Guest]: Accepted in my book.
[Guest]: But and the minute they found somebody defending the reservation policy, they took that as
[Guest]: a confirmation of their suspicion that this person was Dalit.
[Guest]: And sometimes they just asked openly, what is your caste?
[Guest]: Now we asked our respondents, how did you react to this question when you were asked
[Guest]: about the family background?
[Guest]: What do you think they were trying to get at?
[Guest]: And the amazing thing is that our upper caste respondents and our Dalit respondents responded
[Guest]: in completely opposite ways.
[Guest]: Upper caste respondents said it was just a breaking the ice kind of a question.
[Guest]: What's there?
[Guest]: I mean, it's fine.
[Guest]: It's just like you, how you start.
[Guest]: You talk about the weather or something like that.
[Guest]: Because they had family backgrounds that they were proud of.
[Guest]: Whereas every Dalit respondent in our study said, no, this was a trick question.
[Guest]: It was a question that they were using to catch us.
[Guest]: This is about the people who went to job interviews.
[Guest]: Now a lot of private sector jobs in India are not advertised.
[Guest]: They are through networks.
[Guest]: And I have another study for Delhi, which a paper, it's not published yet, but I did
[Guest]: some fieldwork in Delhi.
[Guest]: And there we found that, I mean, we mapped, you know, who do you get the job information
[Guest]: from, et cetera, et cetera.
[Guest]: And you find that Dalit students have very smaller and poorer quality networks in terms
[Guest]: of who they're likely to know.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So even if you have the same education, even if you're equally bright, your ability to
[Guest]: even find out about positions in the private sector are heavily circumscribed by your caste
[Guest]: background.
[Guest]: So in urban India, it plays out differently, but it does play out.
[Guest]: And shadi and all, toh toh open hai, toh puchenge puchenge.
[Guest]: Even my students, when they say, oh, caste is ended, there's no caste, et cetera, I say,
[Guest]: how are you going to get married?
[Guest]: Wo toh caste pe hoga.
[Guest]: You know, so they don't see any contradiction in that, in that, in those two statements.
[Guest]: But my point is that in rural India, it gets replicated in a particular way through knowledge,
[Guest]: through caste-based occupations.
[Guest]: Urban India, proportion of caste-based occupations is low, non-caste-based is higher.
[Guest]: And in principle, every occupation is open to everybody.
[Guest]: But there is a very strong overlap of status and caste, not caste-based occupation.
[Guest]: Because how many Brahmins are you going to find in Delhi who are priests in temples?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So obviously they're not doing their caste-based occupation.
[Guest]: But if you see very privileged occupations, which caste groups are occupying those?
[Guest]: How much has been the churning?
[Guest]: How much has the deck reshuffled?
[Guest]: That's the question we should ask about cities.
[Guest]: Because sociologists, what they do is they say, oh, you know, the link between caste-based
[Guest]: occupations and birth is broken in urban India.
[Guest]: Yes, of course, because caste-based occupations, think about the occupations that are listed
[Guest]: in the caste system.
[Guest]: Think about a modern economy.
[Guest]: You are trying to superimpose a modern occupational structure on the caste-based, the birth-based
[Guest]: occupations that were determined thousands of years ago.
[Guest]: There is bound to be a break, right?
[Guest]: But we have to reframe the question.
[Guest]: We have to talk about now status, privilege and caste rather than caste-based occupation
[Guest]: and caste.
[Guest]: That's not the right question to ask anymore, I don't think.
[Amit Varma]: And also, even on the sort of priests in temples questions, I mean, you are right that there
[Amit Varma]: are not many Brahmins in Delhi who are priests in temples, but I think all the priests in
[Guest]: Delhi are surely Brahmins.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So that also...
[Guest]: In the grammar of caste, I exactly say that, which is, ask it the other way around.
[Amit Varma]: How many non-Brahmins are priests in temples?
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: So, the bit about family networks is true.
[Amit Varma]: It's so unseen that people are getting jobs through different networks and those networks
[Amit Varma]: will often be based around whatever community you're born into and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And that added layer is important.
[Amit Varma]: What you just pointed out about how upper caste people in interviews, they won't even
[Amit Varma]: think askance if somebody asks them, what's your caste, or even what's your last name?
[Amit Varma]: A question like, what's your last name means absolutely nothing to me.
[Amit Varma]: I will just say my last name.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: But if you are Dalit, it means a world because there is that added layer, which is unseen
[Amit Varma]: for most other people.
[Amit Varma]: So here's, you know, like one of the really influential early books in the economics of
[Amit Varma]: discrimination was, of course, a book, The Economics of Description by Gary Becker in
[Amit Varma]: 1957.
[Amit Varma]: I'll briefly summarize for the listeners the point that he makes, which is an influential
[Amit Varma]: point and one that makes a lot of sense.
[Amit Varma]: It is that the cost of discrimination is not just borne by the person discriminated against,
[Amit Varma]: but also by the discriminator.
[Amit Varma]: Like, let us say that you are a company which pays Brahmins 10 rupees and Dalits 8 rupees
[Amit Varma]: to hire them.
[Amit Varma]: For example, if you discriminate, somebody who doesn't discriminate, because of the market
[Amit Varma]: value of labor is actually getting cheaper labor.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, is I would argue even getting a better workforce because today we know there
[Amit Varma]: are studies which showed that the best indicator of good decision making is neither intelligence
[Amit Varma]: nor education, but diversity in the room.
[Amit Varma]: So diversity is a quality to aspire for, for its own sake, which is not something which
[Amit Varma]: there would have been studies in 1957 on.
[Amit Varma]: So whoever is discriminating is therefore also suffering the cost of that.
[Amit Varma]: So if, and this is a big if, if you have a competitive marketplace where there is competition,
[Amit Varma]: then anyone who discriminates automatically is at a disadvantage.
[Amit Varma]: Now this doesn't mean that nobody will discriminate.
[Amit Varma]: Some people might want to do what I think in the literature is called taste based discrimination,
[Amit Varma]: where they decide that they want to discriminate anyway, because their personal values are
[Amit Varma]: like that or whatever, but they bear a cost for it, which is very much as it should be.
[Amit Varma]: But the theory there would be that as you have a more flourishing economy, larger economic
[Amit Varma]: networks, as you would in cities, for example, and more competition, then you would have
[Amit Varma]: caste based discrimination or indeed discrimination of any kind go down, because that discrimination
[Amit Varma]: is sort of expensive.
[Amit Varma]: Now, obviously, in India, this hasn't played out fully yet, because our markets are still
[Amit Varma]: not as open as should be, you don't have those levels of competition.
[Amit Varma]: We do have, you know, caste based discrimination, I would argue would be less in the cities
[Amit Varma]: and in villages, but we haven't solved come anywhere close to solving the problem.
[Amit Varma]: And it's just a muddy swimming pool, for example.
[Amit Varma]: So how does one sort of what was your engagement, for example, with Becker's work?
[Amit Varma]: And did you feel that in a sense, it's really because you can't disentangle all the different
[Amit Varma]: things that are happening?
[Amit Varma]: You know, how useful was it to use, you know, as a frame or as one possible frame in terms
[Amit Varma]: of looking at what is happening in our cities?
[Guest]: So Becker talks about discrimination that exists in the marketplace, which is different
[Guest]: from a like or a dislike.
[Guest]: So his point is that when does a dislike become discrimination, which is when you're willing
[Guest]: to pay a price for it.
[Guest]: So you're willing to take a cut in your income to have the ability to discriminate.
[Guest]: So that's the point that you were making, which is discriminating is discrimination
[Guest]: is costly to the discriminator as well.
[Guest]: And I find that element of Becker's theory very powerful.
[Guest]: And you know, the other theory I teach is by Kenneth Arrow, which is statistical discrimination
[Guest]: and both Arrow and Becker, you know, of the economists of that time with very few two
[Guest]: three equations, they beautifully summarize, which today's authors might take, you know,
[Guest]: very fancy looking many, many equations, etc.
[Guest]: So I find both the theories very illuminating and insightful.
[Guest]: However, I don't think anywhere in the world, with the increase in the spread of markets
[Guest]: has discrimination come down.
[Guest]: So I think it's, it boils down to the question of how do we make sure that discrimination
[Guest]: is really costly?
[Guest]: I mean, it must make a real, we have to have incentives such that it should be very difficult
[Guest]: or it should be very costly for a person to exercise discrimination in the marketplace.
[Guest]: Likes and dislikes, you cannot control, people will always have them, right?
[Guest]: But in certain settings, discrimination is more costly than in other settings, right?
[Guest]: So, for example, one of the things in India is that we don't have a broad based anti-discrimination
[Guest]: law.
[Guest]: We have the Prevention of Atrocities Act against SCSD that addresses an important part of the
[Guest]: problem, which is hate crimes, which are targeted against certain communities for who they are.
[Guest]: But the burden of proof is very high under that act.
[Guest]: And also the whole system needs to be, sort of militates against a conviction because
[Guest]: the police will not register a report, etc, etc, the whole thing.
[Guest]: So while it's an important act, it doesn't cover microaggressions, it doesn't cover daily
[Guest]: acts of discrimination, it doesn't, it's not a broad based anti-discriminatory law.
[Guest]: And so there is, I mean, our legal system, that's another problem.
[Guest]: But my point is that even as, just even in principle, there is no anti-discrimination
[Guest]: law, whether it's about caste or gender or disability or anything else for that matter.
[Guest]: So there is no legal framework that makes discrimination costly, right?
[Guest]: Even in the United States, the person that I mentioned earlier, Sandy Darity, William
[Guest]: Darity Jr., who's a Duke, he has been campaigning in the US along with others.
[Guest]: Look at what he calls ADOS, American Descendants of Slavery, not of slaves, not that individuals
[Guest]: have to be descendants of slaves, but African Americans today are descendants of the system
[Guest]: of slavery.
[Guest]: That's his point.
[Guest]: And he has, you know, he has a lot of statistics about how, you know, whether you take the
[Guest]: median wealth gap, education, et cetera, et cetera.
[Guest]: And it's not about education, as many economists argue in the US context, which is that Blacks
[Guest]: are less educated, that explains everything, no.
[Guest]: So even Whites with no college education earn more than Blacks with college education, for
[Guest]: example, et cetera, et cetera.
[Guest]: So he has a whole bunch of things.
[Guest]: So his point is that what can be done in the US to address the wealth gap between Whites
[Guest]: and American Descendants of Slavery, ADOS community.
[Guest]: And so, you know, my point is that maybe the market won't fix this problem in itself, you
[Guest]: know.
[Guest]: And what the best interventions are, you know, that question is open, we can all discuss
[Guest]: and debate it.
[Guest]: Reservations is a very tiny, tiny, tiny little tool which is chipping away at one tiny part
[Guest]: of the problem.
[Guest]: But given in the absence of anything else, I think it should stay.
[Guest]: But I think we should continue to debate about what is it that's going to make a dent.
[Guest]: But prior to that comes the recognition.
[Guest]: As long as we deny that the problem is big, we are never going to get at the solutions.
[Amit Varma]: So a couple of points to what you said, as far as the question of market solving discrimination
[Amit Varma]: in the way that Becker suggested would happen, I would say that, you know, nothing is a panacea,
[Amit Varma]: right?
[Amit Varma]: You can have discrimination, and it's the same swimming pool problem that in places
[Amit Varma]: where you have flourishing competitive marketplaces, but discrimination still exists.
[Amit Varma]: You don't know the counterfactual, what if the markets were less free?
[Amit Varma]: Would there have been, you know, more or less discrimination?
[Amit Varma]: We don't know that.
[Amit Varma]: So it just becomes a question of what, you know, what prism you're going with when you
[Amit Varma]: address a subject like that.
[Amit Varma]: And the other sort of position I have a bias, I have a preference that I have is just of
[Amit Varma]: being extremely wary of coercive state solutions for I just think that an anti discrimination
[Amit Varma]: law would just be, you know, would just be posturing, it would, you know, the intention
[Amit Varma]: would be great, the outcome would be absolutely nothing, wherever, you know, the state has
[Amit Varma]: tried to, like, I think a lot of social problems need to be solved by society.
[Amit Varma]: And the state should, of course, step in when the rights of people are being infringed.
[Amit Varma]: But when you try to do social engineering through state coercion, I'm not sure it works.
[Amit Varma]: For example, we had a, you know, everybody agrees that there should be maternity leave.
[Amit Varma]: But when you had that recent maternity leave act, it hurt women more than it helped them
[Amit Varma]: because employment went down, and are linked to pieces that kind of showed at which I had
[Amit Varma]: commissioned for Pragati by Devika Kher and Suman Joshi.
[Amit Varma]: And the so I'm sort of wary of coercive approaches kind of by the state, I think these are deep,
[Amit Varma]: deep social problems, which at some point, you know, and like you said, it's muddy, we
[Amit Varma]: don't know what the solutions are.
[Amit Varma]: But just to sort of underscore, like I found what you've written about arrow and arrows
[Amit Varma]: work on statistical discrimination, also to be illuminative of the way social pressures
[Amit Varma]: work out to make a situation worse.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll quickly sum that up for my listeners.
[Amit Varma]: And you can tell me if I've missed a nuance or made a mistake.
[Amit Varma]: And he basically talks about how, you know, there can be these self fulfilling prophecies
[Amit Varma]: in play, where if you're a Dalit, or a woman, you just assume that certain professions are
[Amit Varma]: close to you, right?
[Amit Varma]: And because you assume that they are close to you, because of social prejudices, which
[Amit Varma]: are obviously there, you don't pursue those fields, and it becomes a self fulfilling prophecy
[Amit Varma]: and a vicious circle.
[Amit Varma]: For example, in the case of gender, you could say that women are socialized to believe key
[Amit Varma]: up humanities, parole languages, parole stem matkaro.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you have less women going in for that, though, increasingly, thankfully,
[Amit Varma]: in recent times, more and more, but otherwise, you have less women going in for that.
[Amit Varma]: So which is it becomes an example of self fulfilling prophecy and the kind of statistical
[Amit Varma]: discrimination which arrow talks about.
[Amit Varma]: And this can also result in disparities in the labor market, which are not happening
[Amit Varma]: directly because of discrimination at the time.
[Amit Varma]: But it's just a way that whole game is played out.
[Guest]: So first I'll push back, I completely agree on the state not being, should not be able
[Guest]: to exercise coercive power, absolutely, no doubt about that.
[Guest]: But I'll push back a little bit about the role of legislation that's coming from the
[Guest]: top.
[Guest]: So for example, in the constituent assembly debates, Ambedkar was of the view that the
[Guest]: approach suggested by Gandhi, which is a change of heart, be, you know, abolish untouchability
[Guest]: by doing the work that so clean your own toilets, intermarry, etc.
[Guest]: That relies too much on the individual initiative.
[Guest]: And that's never going to happen, because he felt that untouchability was an integral
[Guest]: part of the caste system, whereas Gandhi thought that untouchability is a part of the caste
[Guest]: system, that's not good, but the rest of the caste system is fine.
[Guest]: And Ambedkar questioned that and his point is that unless you make it mandatory, it's
[Guest]: not going to happen.
[Guest]: And today, the reason that India has a Dalit, whatever the magnitude of that, and obviously
[Guest]: not enough, but today, the reason that India has a Dalit middle class that's vocal, that's
[Guest]: active, we see all these autobiographies coming out, we, you know, it's not by no means enough.
[Guest]: And the problem is much larger than that.
[Guest]: But this has happened because of the compulsory affirmative action.
[Guest]: In Scandinavia, the fact that you now see women in government and in corporate boardrooms,
[Guest]: it's completely normal to see women now, as ministers, as important spokesperson, it has
[Guest]: come because of a gender quota.
[Guest]: So my point is that I'm not saying that the state has to step in and solve every problem
[Guest]: because it can't.
[Guest]: And also there's a problem of endogeneity, the state machinery that is supposed to implement
[Guest]: reservations, for example, is itself very, the personnel are themselves very, very caste
[Guest]: conscious.
[Guest]: So they find all ways of scuttling that program and, you know, jeopardizing the, and so that's
[Guest]: always an issue.
[Guest]: So what do you do when the problem is endogenous to the state, right?
[Guest]: So that's always an issue.
[Guest]: But sometimes when the problem is very deep rooted and unlikely to be solved by individual
[Guest]: change of heart, I feel there's a case to be made for a top down legislative kind of
[Guest]: a measure with the full checks and balances put in about coercion not being used, etc.
[Guest]: The main problem is that this endogeneity of the state shows up here is that reservation
[Guest]: is there, you have to do it constitution, nobody checks, people couldn't be bothered
[Guest]: about whether it's working, whether there's, you know, I've tried to collect data on this
[Guest]: question, you will not believe that there's no website anywhere in the government, all
[Guest]: the websites that just tells you the progress of SCST seats reserved through different ministries,
[Guest]: through different bodies, over time.
[Guest]: I've tried to collect data from here, there, everywhere, so I have an incomplete database.
[Guest]: But if it's such an important policy, why isn't there data on this?
[Guest]: Do we know whether there's 22.5% reservation at the national level?
[Guest]: And I did this paper on Indian railways, where we collected data from the railways, there
[Guest]: we discovered that if you look at over time and across zones, we don't have 22.5% reservation
[Guest]: in all the four levels of Indian railway services.
[Guest]: But is there is that an issue is, you know, are we solving that problem anywhere?
[Guest]: I don't think I don't hear any discussion about it.
[Guest]: Whereas if you go to the Safai Karmacharis and the lowest level, it's much higher than
[Guest]: 22.5%.
[Guest]: So if you look at only Safai Karmacharis, which is a separate category of workers, it's
[Guest]: about 90% is SC.
[Guest]: I don't see any march on the street today to say abolish inequality in jobs for Safai
[Guest]: Karmacharis.
[Guest]: All castes must be equally represented.
[Guest]: Why not?
[Guest]: You know, so, I mean, we have to think of how deep rooted and structural these problems
[Guest]: are.
[Guest]: And then think about whether individual initiative will change this or even if you talk the language
[Guest]: of incentives, what is it that will shift incentives?
[Guest]: That's the question that I'm asking.
[Guest]: I mean, I'm not a legal expert, so I don't know how the what the contours of the anti
[Guest]: discriminatory law are going to be.
[Guest]: And maybe that's that I think it's needed anyway, regardless of anything else, whether
[Guest]: that will solve the problem or not.
[Guest]: Okay, maybe not.
[Guest]: But how would you change the incentives such that people find it costly to discriminate
[Guest]: along these?
[Guest]: It's an open question.
[Guest]: And I, you know, I would encourage everybody to think about it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, on the Gandhi-Ambedkar debates as they were, I completely I agree with both
[Amit Varma]: of them in different aspects of the problem.
[Amit Varma]: I completely agree with Ambedkar about the toxicity of caste.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, caste is not the only thing wrong with Hinduism, but there is just a lot that
[Amit Varma]: is toxic.
[Amit Varma]: So there I'm completely with him.
[Amit Varma]: I think a lot of the things that Gandhi said on caste were just virtue signaling and waffling
[Amit Varma]: and you know, not going far enough, honestly.
[Amit Varma]: However, where I am more sympathetic towards Gandhi, and this is of course, with the benefit
[Amit Varma]: of hindsight, is on the means adopted to get there where Gandhi's point was that real social
[Amit Varma]: change comes from the bottom up, and that's where it's long lasting.
[Amit Varma]: And if you do something top down, you know, it'll just be on the surface.
[Amit Varma]: And I think Ambedkar realized this when he spoke of the constitution being just a top
[Amit Varma]: soil, you know, and at the ground underneath, as we saw from his court and villages earlier,
[Amit Varma]: it's just so messy.
[Amit Varma]: But I mean, there was nothing he could do.
[Amit Varma]: This was the best that he could do at the time, social change can take decades.
[Amit Varma]: So I understand where that's coming from.
[Amit Varma]: And honestly, when I'm when I spoke of a top down intervention, I wasn't even thinking
[Amit Varma]: of affirmative action, I was thinking of more like anti discrimination law, which in my
[Amit Varma]: mind in practice on the ground would achieve nothing, it might even create perverse incentives
[Amit Varma]: of different types.
[Amit Varma]: And it would just give activists the satisfaction of being able to say ki ha humne kuch kiya.
[Amit Varma]: It's really in the category in my mind of saying that we must do something, this is
[Amit Varma]: something, therefore, let's do it.
[Guest]: You know, so I'm going to be a bit cynical about state led.
[Guest]: I mean, I'm just saying that we need to collectively think about what is it that will make it costly
[Guest]: for people to discriminate?
[Guest]: Let's stop there.
[Guest]: I mean, I think that's the real question.
[Guest]: I agree with you.
[Guest]: And so I think that's the question that we but before we do that, we have to recognize
[Guest]: and admit that discrimination is a current contemporary problem.
[Guest]: So there's not that much agreement on it, not as much as you.
[Guest]: So I'll tell you about another paper of mine, which I did with Dean Spears, where we looked
[Guest]: at charitable giving.
[Guest]: Now, in social psychology, there is a phenomenon called the identified victim effect, which
[Guest]: is you know, when you get these charity ke liye donations, they always show you a picture
[Guest]: of a little girl or something and will give you a name that Sarita in Muzaffarpur, Bihar
[Guest]: is you know, can't go to school, please donate for education, etc.
[Guest]: And in social psychology literature, experiment after experiment in a variety of cultural
[Guest]: settings has found that an identified victim, which is you put a name and a face always
[Guest]: gets greater charity than a statistical cause.
[Guest]: You could just translate all this to say, so many million girls in Bihar are lacking
[Guest]: education, please donate to a charity which is working for their cause, as it was to Sarita
[Guest]: in Bihar.
[Guest]: So Sarita in Bihar ad will get more charitable donations than a generic charity.
[Guest]: So what we did was we took, we did three experiments, upper caste Hindus, Dalit Hindus, OBCs and
[Guest]: Muslims, and then we had a named ad and a statistical ad, right?
[Guest]: And we found that for all other categories, the named ad got higher donations than the
[Guest]: statistical ad, which proves the identified victim effect.
[Guest]: But for Dalits, it was opposite.
[Guest]: So the charity, the generic, the statistical charity got more donation than a named Dalit
[Guest]: victim.
[Guest]: So when we first sent it with just one experiment to the referee, they said, how do you know
[Guest]: that people are recognizing this as a Dalit name?
[Guest]: It could just be some name that they picked up.
[Guest]: And we had four names for each category.
[Guest]: So it wasn't linked to any one name.
[Guest]: It was all four names aggregated.
[Guest]: Then we did a two-stage experiment where we first gave names and said, tick, write the
[Guest]: caste you think they belong to.
[Guest]: And then we, for every category, we gave 20 names and we booked the five most recognized
[Guest]: names.
[Guest]: And then using those names, we ran the experiment again and the result went through.
[Guest]: And this links with a larger literature in the social psychology field, which believes,
[Guest]: and we are seeing some of it play out today in India's context, where some victims are
[Guest]: seen as deserving of sympathy and other victims are seen as deserving the fate that they got.
[Guest]: In other words, they generate disgust or they generate anger.
[Guest]: So certain victims get a lot of sympathy for their situation.
[Guest]: Another person in exactly the same situation, even worse, will not get that sympathy.
[Guest]: And that depends on which group that person belongs to, you know.
[Guest]: So is the group worthy of sympathy or not?
[Guest]: And that is what that paper is about, you know, and we are seeing that being played
[Amit Varma]: out.
[Amit Varma]: I completely agree with you.
[Amit Varma]: And maybe it's just a selection bias of the circles that I move in.
[Amit Varma]: But I can't think of anyone who really denies that there is a caste problem in India, right?
[Amit Varma]: It is our deepest problem.
[Guest]: I mean, even for example.
[Guest]: Nobody denies it, but is it just something, you know, there was big gaps in the past and
[Guest]: we are sort of narrowing and getting better.
[Guest]: And so eventually, it's just a question of when we achieve convergence, or is it that
[Guest]: there's divergence going on right now?
[Amit Varma]: On that, there is dis.
[Amit Varma]: Because my sense is that the modern bigots, which we see around us, are actually happy
[Amit Varma]: to boast about caste discrimination.
[Amit Varma]: For example, when, you know, Bilqis Bano's rapist and the killers of a family were released,
[Amit Varma]: you know, there was a BJP MP or MLA or whatever, saying those things on air about how they
[Amit Varma]: are Brahmins.
[Unknown]: So they can't be bad.
[Amit Varma]: So they kind of seem to wear the casteism on their sleeve.
[Guest]: So, you know, I'm talking about academic circles, yeah, fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: And just to sort of get back, I completely agree that, you know, that people who decry
[Amit Varma]: some solutions have to then come up with the solutions.
[Amit Varma]: My is that, you know, just looking through history, that coercive state solutions don't
[Amit Varma]: often do much.
[Amit Varma]: And I think the incentives have to change and they have to change from within society.
[Amit Varma]: And I think if we had a faster growing economy, more urbanization, the incentives would change
[Amit Varma]: in the direction that I think Becker broadly says that they would.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, it's a swimming pool problem, you know, is it happening because of this
[Amit Varma]: or that?
[Amit Varma]: So my final question on this on this subject, before we go on to talking about gender, Thomas
[Amit Varma]: Saville, who's, of course, African American economist, written many great books, which
[Amit Varma]: I love wrote this influential book in early 2000s, affirmative action around the world,
[Amit Varma]: where he looked at affirmative action in a number of different cities.
[Amit Varma]: And what he essentially concluded was that in the city in the countries that he looked
[Amit Varma]: at, he couldn't find any beneficial effect of it on the groups under question, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: individuals who receive affirmative action will benefit, but on the groups themselves,
[Amit Varma]: he couldn't find any long term sort of impact.
[Amit Varma]: And one could argue that this is again, the swimming pool problem, like how do you disentangle
[Amit Varma]: there are no counterfactuals, all of that, I understand that.
[Amit Varma]: And a couple of the points he made about it was that, among many points, and a couple
[Amit Varma]: of the points he made was that number one, the benefits, of course, went to those who
[Amit Varma]: were more relatively more privileged among the groups in question.
[Amit Varma]: So that's a creamy layer argument.
[Amit Varma]: And the other point was one of group polarization.
[Amit Varma]: And in your book itself, I'll quote this para by you, where at one point, you write, quote,
[Amit Varma]: what is often loosely called a quota mentality can be interpreted to engender a certain brand
[Amit Varma]: of identity politics, which draws sustenance from the existence of caste based fissures.
[Amit Varma]: The proponents of this brand of identity politics, for example, the current chief minister of
[Amit Varma]: UP and leader of the Bhajan Samajpati Mayawati would much rather keep caste divisions alive,
[Amit Varma]: as it justifies their existence.
[Amit Varma]: Because then become a tool for mobilizing their constituency, rather than an instrument
[Amit Varma]: of genuine empowerment of Dalits.
[Amit Varma]: This brand of identity politics is therefore inimical to the idea of annihilation of caste.
[Amit Varma]: And though the leadership might use Ambedkar's iconic value to further his case, his actual
[Amit Varma]: practices are antithetical to Ambedkar's vision and goal of a casteless society, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this was written, I think, in 2010.
[Amit Varma]: So obviously, when you're referring to UPCM and all that, it's sort of from that time.
[Amit Varma]: But this is the other criticism that is sometimes made against reservations and it's twofold.
[Amit Varma]: And one is that it's sort of that while the Constitution says that we will treat everyone
[Amit Varma]: equally, this solidifies these differences of identity and can that be a good thing?
[Amit Varma]: Can that lead to more polarization?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And the second is that reservations can then become a political tool, which are, you know,
[Amit Varma]: used for political purposes where the original function is kind of forgotten.
[Amit Varma]: And you yourself have pointed out that many of the OBCs have mobilized it like the Jats
[Amit Varma]: of Haryana, the Marathas of Maharashtra, the Patels of Gujarat are actually relatively
[Amit Varma]: well to do.
[Amit Varma]: And it could be argued that they don't need affirmative action at all.
[Amit Varma]: Certainly they might, you know, so how does one kind of look at these?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, these are doubt the para I quoted, of course, is something that, you know, you
[Amit Varma]: were in a sense sort of summarizing a certain approach to it, but your overall conclusion
[Amit Varma]: was that quotas are needed, you know, they may make little difference, but they do make
[Amit Varma]: a difference.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, what's your feeling on all of this?
[Guest]: Let me start with the second question.
[Guest]: So just FYI, the Marathas, Jats and Patels have not yet been included in the OBC category
[Guest]: and our paper, one of my papers with Rajesh, we look at the justification of that demand
[Guest]: and we find no justification in that.
[Guest]: So first of all, I would make a big distinction between OBCs and SCs, administratively speaking,
[Guest]: because even in terms of the stigmatization that comes from untouchability, OBCs have
[Guest]: not faced that stigma.
[Guest]: So socioeconomic deprivation is just one thing.
[Guest]: I don't think reservation should be used to solve that problem.
[Guest]: Socioeconomic deprivation of any section of the population is bad and we have to find
[Guest]: other solutions for it.
[Guest]: And growth, of course, is one of the mechanisms, but we can think of other things as well.
[Guest]: So I think the OBC problem and the SC problem, first of all, have to be separated and I've
[Guest]: said that the entire time.
[Guest]: For Dalits, the issue is the stigma of untouchability and unfortunately, untouchability pervades
[Guest]: the mindset of people, even today, just recently the Rajasthan teacher boy drinking water,
[Guest]: that episode happened every day, there's something or the other.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So I think that Dalits and OBC reservation, I do not, I've never seen that in the same
[Guest]: bracket.
[Guest]: And I think that the problem is that reservation as a tool has become overextended.
[Guest]: So anybody who has socioeconomic deprivation, give reservation.
[Guest]: That's not a solution.
[Guest]: I don't think.
[Guest]: I think reservations was intended to be used for a group that suffers historical stigma
[Guest]: due to birth in a particular caste.
[Guest]: And I still think that should be the focus of reservations.
[Guest]: So one thing.
[Guest]: The second thing about solidifying caste identities is look at the counterfactual.
[Guest]: There are many, many, many, many arenas where reservation has played no role.
[Guest]: You look at the entire private sector, you look at the MSME sector, you look at any type
[Guest]: of job.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Now, if we were to find evidence that, forget about government jobs where reservation matters
[Guest]: or government education where reservation matters, look at everything else.
[Guest]: What is the evidence on the convergence or divergence between upper caste and Dalits
[Guest]: and I'm not bringing OBC into the picture, just upper caste and Dalits.
[Guest]: Has it been reducing in areas where reservation doesn't matter, because that's the only counterfactual
[Guest]: I can think of.
[Guest]: There is a swimming pool problem here, but there is one section where there's reservation,
[Guest]: one there isn't.
[Guest]: So do we see two opposite trends?
[Guest]: In fact, the opposite.
[Guest]: If anything, the small, tiny part of our economy where there is reservation has lower gaps
[Guest]: between upper caste and Dalits than the arena where there's no reservation.
[Guest]: The creamy layer question, that's a question that's often asked.
[Guest]: Anybody who goes into higher education in India is in the creamy layer of any caste.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: We can never make that argument about anyone else, right?
[Guest]: Saying that, oh, so many generations preceding this person have gotten into college admissions,
[Guest]: so maybe this person should not get priority.
[Guest]: Do we make that argument anywhere?
[Guest]: Nowhere.
[Guest]: In fact, you know, so if we are advantaged because of our social capital, inherited legacy
[Guest]: of just many, many, many generations who are educated, who have access to knowledge, access
[Guest]: to books, it's a way of life.
[Guest]: We are not particularly bothered about inequality there, or we never make this argument that
[Guest]: a particular benefit should be toned down or withheld because poor Brahmins need to
[Guest]: go or poor upper caste need to get in.
[Guest]: We'll never make that argument about upper caste.
[Guest]: So I just don't understand where, by stricture, Dalits were denied education for centuries,
[Guest]: you know.
[Guest]: And so the generation of Dalit families that have education, you know, goes back three,
[Guest]: maximum four in Kerala, maybe.
[Guest]: You're comparing that to literally an unending chain of, you know, educational privilege.
[Guest]: So I think that there is a little bit of, and so in my view, reservation should be targeted
[Guest]: towards the most needy.
[Guest]: In my book, that's Dalits.
[Guest]: Identity politics is a different question.
[Guest]: We can talk about that later, but I'm not an expert on that question.
[Guest]: I'm not a political scientist, but that's a slightly separate question from an objective
[Guest]: reality and what you do.
[Guest]: It's like a racetrack, you know, think of a circular racetrack.
[Guest]: If an accident of birth puts you in the outermost ring of the circular racetrack and an accident
[Guest]: of birth puts me in the innermost ring and we are both given the same time to win the
[Guest]: race and we have similar abilities, who's winning?
[Guest]: I'll win always.
[Guest]: Just because I happen to be born, I happen to be placed by an accident of birth on the
[Guest]: innermost ring.
[Guest]: I have the shortest distance to run.
[Guest]: In sports, we very easily adjust for that by giving the outermost person an advantage.
[Guest]: Just a little bit of an advantage in the beginning.
[Guest]: So I think equality of opportunity, I'm not talking about equality of outcomes.
[Guest]: I think my focus is on equality of opportunity.
[Guest]: Outcomes will be unequal and you know, as long as they are not unequal on account of
[Guest]: birth, I think that's really the question we need to think about.
[Amit Varma]: I agree with you entirely on the importance of equality of opportunity.
[Amit Varma]: And I think we'd both agree that caste is really the most toxic thing about our society.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, we're going to talk about gender next, so that definitely kind of competes
[Amit Varma]: with it.
[Amit Varma]: So what I'd urge everyone listening to do is, no matter what you feel the possible solutions
[Amit Varma]: for this problem are, as long as you accept that this is a problem, you need to know the
[Amit Varma]: extent of the problem and the contours of the problem and the nuances of the problem
[Amit Varma]: and the best way of doing that is by engaging with the literature on it and you are absolutely
[Amit Varma]: the pioneer on that, obviously, so please read Ashwini Deshpande's books and many, many
[Amit Varma]: papers, which, you know, cast so much illumination on this, because we need to sort of understand
[Amit Varma]: the extent of the problem till we can argue from our ivory towers, what should we do?
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk about gender now, you know, so, you know, for many years, you did this pioneering
[Amit Varma]: work on caste.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, part of doing this work also showed you that added layer of gender as you've
[Amit Varma]: pointed out that, you know, yeah, Dalits get the worst of it, but female Dalits are even
[Amit Varma]: worse off, you know.
[Amit Varma]: So at what point did your attention shift to gender as a subject to study?
[Amit Varma]: And now, of course, you've written about it, you have serious insights, I link to talks
[Amit Varma]: you've given on the subject on YouTube, also from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: Yeah, so I don't, I mean, I did those couple of, maybe two or three, I can't remember,
[Guest]: but I did a few early papers were looking at caste, gender, etc, etc.
[Guest]: But it wasn't any systematic set of work, and I think, from about 2013-14, two, three
[Guest]: things came together in, you know, as is the case, I guess, with my life, purely accidentally,
[Guest]: you know, things happen.
[Guest]: One of those was, you know, Vijendra Rao, known as Biju Rao, who's in the World Bank,
[Guest]: he approached me and asked if I would be interested in doing an evaluation of the World Bank supported
[Guest]: program in Maharashtra on the self-help groups.
[Guest]: And I just said yes, because I thought it would be a good opportunity for me to visit
[Guest]: rural Maharashtra other than Rahimathpur.
[Guest]: And you know, my father was alive at that time.
[Guest]: So I thought, oh, it'll be very nice for me to just visit him.
[Guest]: Every time I go to Maharashtra, I can just visit my father, also just to bring, to establish
[Guest]: a better connection.
[Guest]: So I agreed.
[Guest]: And we chose 10, I mean, Biju was not a part of that study, but I chose 10 poorest districts
[Guest]: in Maharashtra, which, of course, was not really in Western Maharashtra.
[Guest]: Most of it was eastern and there's Nandurbar and all that, again, a part of Maharashtra
[Guest]: that never been to.
[Guest]: In fact, I went to Garchiroli, which is a Naxal, you know, where the Naxalite problem
[Guest]: is particularly severe.
[Guest]: So that was a sort of Naxalite territory.
[Guest]: So it just gave me an entry point into a completely different world that I had not encountered
[Guest]: before.
[Guest]: And so I was excited by that.
[Guest]: So that fieldwork, we sampled 10,000 households across 10 poorest districts in Maharashtra.
[Guest]: And that's got me thinking about livelihoods, women, you know, getting together.
[Guest]: These are very poor women who organize themselves in self-help groups and meet once a week and
[Guest]: save small amounts till they become bigger and there's a village organization, then they
[Guest]: get some money from the government, etc.
[Guest]: And then they can form federations, etc.
[Guest]: So the whole structure.
[Guest]: When I went into it, I was very skeptical about this program and I felt like the government
[Guest]: is not giving them jobs or jobs are not getting generated in rural India.
[Guest]: And this is just a little, you know, you do something and you get these women together
[Guest]: and it's just, it's not a very effective program.
[Guest]: That was my understanding.
[Guest]: And I thought that the mobilization also was just formal and it didn't have any substantive
[Guest]: effect on women's lives.
[Guest]: But I went, that was my prior, of course, I didn't say that to anyone.
[Guest]: It wasn't just in my thought.
[Guest]: And what I saw on the field completely changed my view about it.
[Guest]: I mean, it is, it was, I mean, there were points where I had tears in my eyes looking
[Guest]: at the conditions of these women, but their resolve to meet once a week and save 10 rupees
[Guest]: per week, which 2013, I mean, 10 rupees is a small amount for us anytime, but for them,
[Guest]: it was a fairly substantial amount.
[Guest]: And often they would say, I would say, where do you save these 10 rupees from?
[Guest]: And they would say, we cut down milk in our tea, not for the husband, but for themselves
[Guest]: to save these 10 rupees.
[Guest]: And the data, you know, I have another paper about can weak ties create social capital?
[Guest]: Because these are non-kinship based groups.
[Guest]: These are women that you don't know otherwise, and you're engaging with them.
[Guest]: Anyway, there's a whole thing on the SOG movement, etc.
[Guest]: And while in our sample, we didn't find a huge effect on livelihoods.
[Guest]: But it showed me something about the willingness of women to leave their homes, to go out to
[Guest]: meet other women, to engage with the village officials, their propensity to engage with
[Guest]: the gram panchayat, to ask for the ration shop to be opened if it was not open.
[Guest]: I mean, their overall collective action propensity is markedly in better if they are members
[Guest]: of SOGs compared to when they are not.
[Guest]: And we've done a bunch of things to, you know, eliminate all these swimming pool issues,
[Guest]: etc, etc.
[Guest]: And our sample is big enough that we have the power to do that.
[Guest]: And that really got me thinking, looking at the social norms issue very differently.
[Guest]: You know, these are women that they don't have to mobilize in these SOGs.
[Guest]: It's not making an immediate difference to their livelihoods.
[Guest]: But it is a, I think, a problem with jobs creation, which is that there aren't avenues
[Guest]: of employment in rural India.
[Guest]: These are women burdened by domestic work, yet they want to find the time, that one time,
[Guest]: you know.
[Guest]: This whole assumption that women don't want to leave their homes, I don't know where it's
[Guest]: coming from, but it's become such a pervasive assumption.
[Guest]: I just, I've never seen it, never, ever.
[Guest]: Women want to leave their homes, honestly, believe me.
[Guest]: Anyway, so this sort of got me thinking.
[Guest]: And then, of course, there was this paper that happened.
[Guest]: And then there was Professor Naila Kabir, she's at LSE.
[Guest]: She asked me if I would partner with her on a paper on West Bengal, because she's an expert.
[Guest]: She was, she's originally Bangladeshi.
[Guest]: And so she's done a bunch of work on Bangladesh.
[Guest]: And so we thought, if you look at the West Bengal-Bangladesh comparison, it will give
[Guest]: us a nice insights into, because the cultural factors are counterintuitive there.
[Guest]: Because Bangladesh is Islamic, and West Bengal is majority not Islamic.
[Guest]: And the sort of a very popular but erroneous view in this literature is that Islam is a
[Guest]: constraint to female labor force participation.
[Guest]: But if that were the case, then Bangladesh should have been lower than West Bengal.
[Guest]: But we don't find that.
[Guest]: In fact, not just labor force participation, but fertility rates, adoption of contraceptives
[Guest]: is higher in Bangladesh than in West Bengal.
[Guest]: So talk about, you know, cultural stereotypes, completely playing out differently, actually
[Guest]: in the real world anyway.
[Guest]: So because I'd done this fieldwork in Maharashtra, you know, sort of suddenly encountered questions
[Guest]: that I had not encountered before, in my mind, I agreed and we applied, you know, she was
[Guest]: applying for funding, and I became a co-applicant, we got funding, and we did fieldwork in West
[Guest]: Bengal.
[Guest]: And so there's a quantitative component to it, which I have worked on.
[Guest]: And there's a qualitative component to it, which Naila is working on, because she does
[Guest]: more qualitative work, which are interviews with women trying to understand the role of
[Guest]: constraints and the role of, you know, what is it that's preventing them from working?
[Guest]: Is it just that there's not work available?
[Guest]: Is it domestic chores?
[Guest]: At least in the quantitative section, we find that it's really the disproportionate burden
[Guest]: of women being responsible for domestic work.
[Guest]: This not childcare, it's cooking, cleaning, washing clothes, things like that.
[Guest]: And, you know, I know that you have international listeners.
[Guest]: So I just want to say one thing, which is that one big difference between South Asia
[Guest]: and other countries in the world, is that these tasks are done in South Asian homes
[Guest]: every day and several times a day.
[Guest]: In most South Asian homes, fresh meals or hot meals are cooked at least twice, if not
[Guest]: thrice.
[Guest]: Because our homes are not air-conditioned and insulated, we clean our homes every day.
[Guest]: Clothes get washed every day, because we don't have washing machines, we don't store dirty
[Guest]: clothes.
[Guest]: Many people are too poor to have those many clothes that they can go without for a week
[Guest]: without.
[Guest]: So, washing clothes gets done every day, dishes get done every day, several times a day, cooking
[Guest]: gets done every day, cleaning gets done every day.
[Guest]: These are tasks that in the West, either don't get done every day or don't get frequently
[Guest]: done in a day.
[Guest]: And there are dishwashers, washing machines, etc., etc.
[Guest]: And so these elements add a particularly heavy level of domestic chores to women in South
[Guest]: Asia that you don't find in other parts.
[Guest]: And the cultural norm that is a real victim is not Islam, not veiling.
[Guest]: We asked about the practice of veiling, parda.
[Guest]: It isn't that.
[Guest]: It is the disproportionate responsibility of being responsible for domestic chores,
[Guest]: which is women.
[Guest]: And that is a real supply-side constraint that needs to be fixed.
[Guest]: The demand-side constraint is that in rural India, the rate of job creation is very low.
[Guest]: The agricultural technology has displaced female labor more than male labor in agriculture.
[Guest]: And whenever there's a shock, like a drought, my colleague, Kanika Mahajan, has a paper
[Guest]: on drought.
[Guest]: I have a paper on demonetization.
[Guest]: I have another paper on COVID, right?
[Guest]: Whenever there's a shock, unanticipated external shock, an exogenous shock, it hurts female
[Guest]: employment more than it does male, right?
[Guest]: So I think we have to contextualize the role of cultural norms and the role of just plain
[Guest]: demand supply-side factors.
[Guest]: Now, you can say everything is cultural norms.
[Guest]: If it is labor market discrimination, that's also cultural norms.
[Guest]: If you take that view, then every society is governed by regressive cultural norms,
[Guest]: which is an argument, obviously, nobody makes, right?
[Guest]: So I think that there is something called economic discrimination, and I think India
[Guest]: has it too.
[Guest]: Indian women are just as ready to move out of their homes as other women are elsewhere
[Guest]: in the world.
[Guest]: What is it that's tying them down?
[Guest]: Two things.
[Guest]: Get enough jobs in rural India, and B, domestic chores.
[Guest]: So this is the twin work, twin problem that we have to solve.
[Guest]: Childcare or elderly care, even I've looked at the Time News survey data in 2019, for
[Guest]: rural women, that is not the major constraint, because of the way children are brought up
[Guest]: in rural India, they're not individually supervised in a way that you think in a sort of a Western
[Guest]: nuclear family setup, all right?
[Guest]: And the decline in female labor force participation rates has been in rural India.
[Guest]: Urban India has always been low, but it's stagnant, hasn't changed.
[Guest]: Final point on this is that many of us have argued that the proportion of women in economically
[Guest]: active work has not declined, but the amount of work they're doing has declined, and that
[Guest]: gets picked up in the measurement issue.
[Guest]: And there's a researcher called Nicholas Lee, who's at Ryerson University in Canada, he's
[Guest]: analyzed the Time News survey data for 2019.
[Guest]: And the pilot survey, which was done in 1998, there are six states there, he's looked at
[Guest]: the same six states in 2019, and he finds exactly the same thing, that the proportion
[Guest]: of women who are economically active is the same, but the hours they work have declined
[Guest]: drastically in 2019, compared to 98.
[Guest]: And finally, my paper with my student Jeetendra Singh, we use longitudinal data, and we show
[Guest]: that literally every four months, women are entering and exiting employment over frequent
[Guest]: intervals.
[Guest]: Four month intervals are too short for social norms to change.
[Guest]: So they suddenly don't become favorable and women go out, suddenly become unfavorable,
[Guest]: women come in.
[Guest]: That can't be it.
[Guest]: And we've accounted for all of the explanations.
[Guest]: So when you put, these are the dots, Amit, that we were talking about earlier.
[Guest]: Now, when you put all these dots and start joining them, the picture that emerges is
[Guest]: that, yes, there is a problem of domestic chores, but that can be solved.
[Guest]: Other countries in the world have provided for providing these services out of the home,
[Guest]: whether it's childcare, whether it's free good canteens, China, set up canteens at every
[Guest]: workplace so that women and men didn't have to cook at home in the morning before going
[Guest]: to work.
[Guest]: There can be a number of initiatives that can be done, even in rural India, that can
[Guest]: solve for these issues.
[Guest]: You know, provided we again realize that it's, it's solvable, actionable policies, and not
[Guest]: mindsets that are keeping women out of the labor force.
[Amit Varma]: Wonderful.
[Amit Varma]: I want to double click into a bunch of these.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, elaborate a bit on one nuance, which you have pointed out in your writing
[Amit Varma]: and in the talks that you've given, which is that we need to think of the low level
[Amit Varma]: of women working in the workforce and the decline as two separate issues.
[Amit Varma]: So just elaborate on what that difference is and why that difference is important in
[Guest]: thinking about the issue.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So the low level, I think, is related to the domestic chores issue and the fact two things.
[Guest]: One is domestic chores.
[Guest]: The other thing that I didn't mention is that rural India has family owned enterprises that
[Guest]: give livelihood that generate livelihoods.
[Guest]: It can be farming, fishing, orchards, basket making, gourd making, achar making, selling
[Guest]: them in the thing.
[Guest]: Now, all of these enterprises run on the backs of free labor provided by the women in the
[Guest]: household, including children.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Now, these women do not distinguish between their work on the economic enterprise and
[Guest]: their work, which is in the purely domestic sphere.
[Guest]: For them, it's all housework.
[Guest]: And they are not seen as workers on the economic enterprise, neither by their families, nor
[Guest]: by the enumerator who comes and is asking about, you know, who's working in this household,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: And so this slips through the cracks of the statistical system because they don't get
[Guest]: recognized as workers.
[Guest]: They don't have any share in the earnings of the family enterprise.
[Guest]: And they can't go to a bank and say, oh, you know, we have this family enterprise and I'm
[Guest]: going to...
[Guest]: Whereas the husband can go because he's recognized as an owner and worker of that family enterprise.
[Guest]: And so while recognizing them as workers doesn't mean that they will get automatically an equal
[Guest]: share or in the income or, you know, increase their save in decision making, but that's
[Guest]: a first step.
[Guest]: So that's a low level argument, which is the A measurement, which is that there are these
[Guest]: women who are active on economic work, not getting counted.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So that's the low level argument.
[Guest]: The other is domestic chores, which is if hypothetically work was available, you can't
[Guest]: access it because of this overwhelming responsibility of domestic chores.
[Guest]: So that's a level argument.
[Guest]: The decline.
[Guest]: That's where the technology change, the fact that men migrate out to cities, the women
[Guest]: are doing the predominantly the agricultural work or whatever the family enterprise is,
[Guest]: but they're working fewer hours in other type of work that gets counted because work is
[Guest]: fractured and not available on a long term basis, like a contracting work, for example,
[Guest]: they might work 10 days instead of 30, which is what is needed to show up in the data as
[Guest]: as a worker.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And that if you look at the NSS data from 2004, it's very clear decline for men also
[Guest]: a little bit, but for women, you know, strikingly more.
[Guest]: So I think that while overall it's the same problem, I mean, it's not two separate problems,
[Guest]: but when we analyze them, we have to look at the reasons for the low level, differentially
[Guest]: from the reasons for just the other day, there's another paper that actually I'll be presenting
[Guest]: next week, a new paper, which where we looked at SHG membership mobilization, which is increasing
[Guest]: and labor force participation rate, which is decreasing and how the two are connected.
[Guest]: So that paper I'm presenting for the first time next week.
[Guest]: And for that paper to put a graph in that paper, I was looking at LFPRs in 2000s.
[Guest]: India was at about 40 some percent there.
[Guest]: You know, Italy was at about 50 percent.
[Guest]: So not a big gap.
[Guest]: But after 2000s, India has gone down and Italy has gone up.
[Guest]: Turkey, not that much difference in 2000 between India and, you know, so the level effect,
[Guest]: but the trajectory has been in the opposite direction.
[Guest]: So if you look at 2000s, India was low, but not so dramatically low, you know, so again,
[Guest]: the social norm story will miss that, that element, because if it were the they're so
[Guest]: dramatically different, why did we have India so much closer to some of the European countries?
[Guest]: Admittedly, not to Scandinavia and all that true.
[Guest]: But you know, so that's the thing.
[Guest]: And so we have to analyze the decline, because obviously, something is happening in the last
[Guest]: 15 years, that's led to the decline and that we should fix that.
[Guest]: And then we have to go back to the problem of increasing the levels too, right?
[Guest]: Because even at its peak, it was like 30 or 40 percent, which is not a great LFPR figure,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So if we start working on the decline first, maybe we'll, you know, come to a point where
[Guest]: we can think of the level effect.
[Amit Varma]: See, I think this is an exact example of how an economist can use data in a bad way.
[Amit Varma]: Now a bad economist could take the data point you just gave and conclude that what has happened
[Amit Varma]: is that women from India have gone to Italy and started working there, which explains
[Unknown]: the divergence.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, I've done episodes on sort of a female labor force participation with Namita
[Amit Varma]: Bhandare, Vishrayana Bhattacharya earlier in the year, and an extremely popular episode.
[Amit Varma]: I'll link them from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, what you said about, you know, women working in family owned enterprises
[Amit Varma]: and that not being recognized is resonant because a recent guest of mine on the show,
[Amit Varma]: Vinay Singhal, he grew up in a village in Haryana.
[Amit Varma]: And he speaks about how his father used to run this kirana store and a little business,
[Amit Varma]: I think distributing grain or whatever, and his mother would cook for all the workers.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, she would never be recognized as part of the business, never get kind of
[Amit Varma]: paid for it.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, obviously, she's not getting, you know, recognized for all the unpaid work she
[Amit Varma]: does even.
[Amit Varma]: But that's kind of how it is.
[Amit Varma]: I won't.
[Amit Varma]: Another fascinating phenomenon that you've written about, which I'll ask you to elaborate
[Amit Varma]: upon is what we discussed earlier, the U-shaped relationship between education and employment
[Amit Varma]: and the implications of that.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: So I think overall, if you look at from the 2000s, education levels of Indian women have
[Guest]: drastically risen.
[Guest]: And not just in primary, secondary, but also tertiary.
[Guest]: So for example, in colleges where we, you know, the spaces that we inhabit, it's not
[Guest]: at all unusual to find a 50-50 or even a 60-40 classroom where 60% is female and 40% is male,
[Guest]: including in subjects like economics and STEM, etc.
[Guest]: So in India, actually, women's enrollment in tertiary education has dramatically increased.
[Guest]: And male-female education gaps in terms of levels of education have dramatically decreased.
[Guest]: The problem is that the highly educated women, which is, you know, PG and above, or illiterate
[Guest]: women, the two ends of the spectrum, they work, you know, illiterate women, partly it's
[Guest]: obviously a class issue.
[Guest]: So they will work whatever informal work, daily wage work, whatever it is, their income
[Guest]: is, you know, every day is a question of survival.
[Guest]: So you have to work.
[Guest]: So you'll do something to get by.
[Guest]: Highly educated women, there is a market, you know, and highly educated women, labor
[Guest]: force participation is also high, which is by the way, contradicts that famous income
[Guest]: effect argument in which economists make.
[Guest]: So but the middle level, some of it could be that they're still in school, but even
[Guest]: when you take women 20 and above, which is unlikely that they're going to be in school,
[Guest]: the issue is that job opportunities for girls who finish class eight or 10 or 12, even when
[Guest]: you think about it in cities, there aren't those kinds of job opportunities, you know,
[Guest]: so think about, say, a mobile repair shop.
[Guest]: Have you ever seen a woman sitting in a mobile repair shop and doing it?
[Guest]: But why not?
[Guest]: You know, why couldn't she do it?
[Guest]: Nowadays, I find this, I think DLF, one of the courier companies, uses women to deliver
[Guest]: packages to homes.
[Guest]: And why is it that city women can't do that?
[Guest]: They can, right?
[Guest]: And obviously, DLF has taken a view.
[Guest]: Drivers, they can be a whole bunch of other jobs that middle level education, women with
[Guest]: middle level education can reasonably do, provided we fix the infrastructure, right?
[Guest]: So recently, I used this company called BlueSmart to go to the airport.
[Guest]: And there was a female driver, and I was very intrigued, so I talked to her a lot about
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: And so she was saying that in Delhi, it's very difficult to get toilets to stop in the
[Guest]: middle for the women in public to go to, you know, because in Gurgaon, they're non-existent.
[Guest]: In Delhi, at least some petrol pumps have female toilets, Noida apparently is very good.
[Guest]: So literally every kilometer, she says that we can find, you know, toilets for women.
[Guest]: Now, that would be already a big disincentive, discouragement for female drivers.
[Guest]: I mean, you're on the road the whole day, you know, you need a space where you can use
[Guest]: the washroom, right?
[Guest]: Things like that.
[Guest]: So it needs a mindset to draw women into occupations that can be done with this middle level of
[Guest]: education.
[Guest]: And recently, I've got, you know, biggish grant from the Gates Foundation to precisely
[Guest]: pilot with the private sector to work out initiatives that A, pull women into the labor
[Guest]: force, but also allow them to become self-employed entrepreneurs, not just in the traditional
[Guest]: beauty parlor, tailor, cook sector, but other things as well, because women are getting
[Guest]: more and more educated and they can do other things.
[Guest]: It's partly a question of mindset, partly a question of networks.
[Guest]: And I don't know what this, how much we'll be able to do, but we are partnering with
[Guest]: big private sector employers to see what solutions can be found, because we, I do definitely
[Guest]: believe that the problem is solvable and I do believe that it's a demand side problem
[Guest]: more than, I think, okay, let me rephrase that.
[Guest]: I think that if you make big changes on the demand side, supply side will adjust itself.
[Guest]: I don't think, you know, talking about the mindset thing that we talked about earlier,
[Guest]: if you wait for mindsets to change inside families without any changes in the external
[Guest]: economic conditions, that's not going to happen.
[Guest]: So as opportunities become available, women start leaving the house, families will have
[Guest]: to adjust, you know, to that situation as they did everywhere else.
[Guest]: I mean, even developed countries today, take Britain, for example, it didn't have the labor
[Guest]: force participation rate of women that it has today.
[Guest]: It didn't have that in the, you know, early decades of the 20th century.
[Guest]: Women did stay at home and they were, you know, homemakers, caregivers, etc, etc.
[Guest]: But family dynamics changed as women exited.
[Guest]: That's the causation, not that first family dynamics changed, then women exited.
[Guest]: It hasn't happened in history.
[Guest]: And I think I'm pretty sure India will be the same.
[Amit Varma]: And just to clarify for the listener who may not be familiar with some of these terms,
[Amit Varma]: what do you mean by supply side issues?
[Amit Varma]: Are things like marriage, motherhood, yes, maybe there are those conservative norms.
[Guest]: So these are all supply side means anything that affects women's supply of their own labor
[Guest]: to the market.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: And your point is that no women want to go out and work, right, partly because of how
[Unknown]: their homes are, and, you know, they've got aspirations and which human being doesn't.
[Amit Varma]: So it's you solve the demand side, you kind of solve the, you know, the big side of that
[Amit Varma]: problem.
[Amit Varma]: So here's another question long back with three women guests, I had done an episode
[Amit Varma]: called metrics of empowerment, where the question I threw at them was that if we are to kind
[Amit Varma]: of get a sense of how far women are progressing or have progressed, what are those metrics
[Amit Varma]: of empowerment?
[Amit Varma]: And these ranged from serious ones, like I put forth and I'd written a column on it many
[Amit Varma]: years back, which got me a lot of flack, where I said that rising divorce rates are fantastic,
[Amit Varma]: because they indicate that more and more women are getting empowered to get out of toxic
[Amit Varma]: relationships.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and I don't remember, you know, my guests were Devika, Hamsini, Nidhi, I don't
[Amit Varma]: remember what specific metrics they came up with, I think one of them was an increase
[Unknown]: in men using grocery apps, you know, so things like a little out of the box and all that.
[Amit Varma]: So if I can, and I can't honestly think of anyone better than you to answer this, because
[Amit Varma]: you are both an expert in this subject, as well as someone who thinks out of the box.
[Amit Varma]: So what are some sort of conventional and unconventional metrics that you can look at
[Guest]: to say, this is a good sign, you know, this is a very contested area about how do you
[Guest]: measure empowerment.
[Guest]: And my first point that I'll make is that it's a process.
[Guest]: It's not a, it's not a goalpost that you've reached, you know.
[Guest]: So I think the first mindset is that it's an ongoing process, and it's an ongoing process
[Guest]: everywhere in the world.
[Guest]: You there are some, there's progress on some indicators, there's not so much as much progress
[Guest]: on other indicators.
[Guest]: So first things first, you know, a very simple and which I always ask in my interviews in
[Guest]: my fieldwork is, do you own a smartphone which you use yourself?
[Guest]: It's not like there's a smartphone in the house, which occasionally I get to use, no.
[Guest]: Earlier, I used to ask, do you wear a watch, but nowadays, no one wears a watch.
[Guest]: But earlier, wearing a watch was, I thought, a very nice way of, because if the woman is
[Guest]: wearing a watch, that means there's something time bound that she needs to pay attention
[Guest]: to, you know, and domestic work is not time bound in the same way.
[Guest]: It is, I mean, roughly speaking, time bound.
[Guest]: For a husband, a husband needs his food on time.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, but not so much, like 10 o'clock, I mean, come on, it's not that much, the watch is
[Amit Varma]: always at home.
[Amit Varma]: I'm kidding, man.
[Guest]: But if she's wearing a watch, that means she's either catching a bus or she's going somewhere
[Guest]: and she needs to be back at a particular time, you know, this indicates some involvement
[Guest]: in an activity that she needs to keep track of, so that, because you have to do the housework,
[Guest]: whether you work outside or not, you have to do the housework, right?
[Guest]: So that's one good question.
[Guest]: The smartphone one is another one.
[Guest]: This grocery shopping one is nice.
[Guest]: I like that thing.
[Guest]: But you know, all these empowerment questions also I find, in fact, I was just talking to
[Guest]: two very young researchers the other day, and one of the questions that all these questionnaires
[Guest]: have is, do you go to, and then there is a list of places, and then answers are alone
[Guest]: with husband, etc, etc.
[Guest]: And one of them, when they change it to the Indian format, they ask, do you go to the
[Guest]: village fair, something, something, something, and then alone, right?
[Guest]: And most women say no to that.
[Guest]: And my point is that women don't want to go alone to that, not because they're afraid.
[Guest]: The whole activity is a social activity, going to a fair, buying bangles, sitting on a swing,
[Guest]: applying henna, all of these are social activities, and women look forward to that.
[Amit Varma]: You can go with a friend.
[Guest]: You can go with a friend.
[Guest]: So in the West, in a way that going alone is seen as empowerment, it can be, and in
[Guest]: certain contexts it is, but doing a leisure activity with other people in South Asia is
[Guest]: not lack of empowerment.
[Guest]: In fact, one of the things we saw in the SHG groups also, women love the fact, you know,
[Guest]: I have so many videos of them singing and just, you know, that one hour that they spend
[Guest]: together, they like it genuinely, you know, to be with other people.
[Guest]: So you know, sometimes when you think of, I don't think we should look for these global
[Guest]: metrics of empowerment.
[Guest]: I know that there's a quest to do that because of comparability issues.
[Guest]: But I think that some sensitivity to context and to nuance.
[Guest]: And the number of times I've seen this answer saying, oh, you know, Indian women don't go
[Guest]: to the Mela alone.
[Guest]: We don't want to go to the Mela alone.
[Guest]: The whole point about the Mela is to have fun there.
[Guest]: And we want to go with our friends.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it's not lack of empowerment.
[Amit Varma]: I think the danger here is also what economists called isomorphic mimicry.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I've done an episode on this with Shruti and Alex, this seems to me like a foreign
[Amit Varma]: kind of mindset, which you bring here and you assume that it will still apply.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is like this nuance.
[Guest]: We don't want to go to the Mela.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, the question if it had been, if you wanted to go alone, would you be able
[Amit Varma]: to?
[Guest]: Yeah, that's a different thing.
[Guest]: I mean, if I supposing I really want to go to the Mela alone, I should be allowed to
[Guest]: do that.
[Guest]: But if I don't ever go to a Mela and you know, just take myself, me as an example, obviously,
[Guest]: I'm quote unquote empowered enough to go anywhere alone, you know, but somehow it's in my head
[Guest]: that when I watch a movie, particularly in the movie, I don't want to go alone.
[Guest]: So I always look for a companion, not because I can't, obviously I can, but the whole fun
[Guest]: of going to a Hindi movie is to be with somebody.
[Guest]: And I usually look for someone who would, you know, so, you know, often nowadays my
[Guest]: daughter is my companion earlier, you know, friends or whatever, but the whole point of
[Guest]: it is the fun of it, right?
[Guest]: So I always tell students that whenever you do make a questionnaire, first apply to yourself
[Guest]: and answer all the questions yourself and then see whether the conclusions that it's
[Guest]: drawing about you, you like those conclusions or not, or making major financial purchases
[Guest]: alone.
[Guest]: I don't do it.
[Guest]: I have never made a major financial purchase alone.
[Guest]: I don't want to do it.
[Guest]: If I buy a TV or a fridge or a gold bangle or property, all of which I have bought, but
[Guest]: I want to consult my husband, I want to consult my family.
[Amit Varma]: And even I don't do it.
[Guest]: I mean, these are decisions you take together, right?
[Guest]: Because you are a family unit and many of these are family things to enjoy, you know?
[Guest]: So I just feel like we need to be more sensitive to questions and, you know, how they are framed
[Guest]: and how the question is framed will determine your answer, you know?
[Guest]: So when you say alone, zero, okay, not empowered, you know, and people aggregate these zeros
[Guest]: and ones and the more the number of zeros are, that's what I was telling.
[Guest]: I said, no, please count alone with husband because I understand that there is a power
[Guest]: dynamic between husband and wife.
[Guest]: But otherwise, you know, if you just do this, otherwise there'll be so many zeros because
[Guest]: there are some activities that we do do together.
[Guest]: I don't think it's necessarily lack of empowerment.
[Amit Varma]: And what you just said about how you advise your researchers, keep, you know, answer it
[Amit Varma]: yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Don't just, you know, don't just tick boxes.
[Amit Varma]: Don't just blindly put the survey out there.
[Amit Varma]: That gets me to again thinking aloud about how in so many professions, especially in
[Amit Varma]: corporate setups, most people are going through the motions.
[Amit Varma]: They don't care deeply.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you know, because of incentives, you're likely to find the higher up you go
[Amit Varma]: in a company or a startup, the more the person is likely to care because skin in the game
[Amit Varma]: and all there's more at stake and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But most people are going through the motions.
[Amit Varma]: Most people are ticking boxes.
[Amit Varma]: Most people are showing up for work.
[Amit Varma]: It's the same old grind.
[Amit Varma]: What's the scene in academia like, you know, I just from my conversation with you, I can
[Amit Varma]: see how animated you are by these questions and you're thinking about every aspect of
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm sure you're the kind of person who's like dreaming of conducting surveys and papers
[Amit Varma]: when you're asleep in REM sleep.
[Amit Varma]: But in general, when you look at your colleagues and your associates and all that, do you feel
[Amit Varma]: that there is a similar phenomenon playing out there that many people, once they get
[Amit Varma]: into that particular kind of academic groove, they're just doing the thing that passion
[Amit Varma]: and engagement.
[Guest]: I mean, what's the scene there?
[Guest]: I think it's a mixed bag.
[Guest]: I think it'll be hard to sort of generalize.
[Guest]: It depends a lot on location, where you are, the right institutional setting, you know.
[Guest]: And again, coming back to Ashoka, I have to say that Ashoka gives a very enabling environment.
[Guest]: We have a very young department, large and young department.
[Guest]: And I really love the energy because all these young people are there, you know, doing different
[Guest]: things and some are working on theories, some are working on data, but there's a lot of
[Guest]: excitement and there's a lot of, you know, what is the word I'm looking for, vibrancy.
[Guest]: That may not be the case elsewhere.
[Guest]: And I think public institutions are going through a period of crisis for many different
[Unknown]: reasons and in many different ways.
[Guest]: But I think the, once people start to lose that intellectual curiosity and excitement,
[Guest]: I think that's where the death knell, you know, like that begins the death of the, because
[Guest]: at the end of the day in academics, I mean, publishing, of course, it's important.
[Guest]: I mean, I also would like to publish as much as I can.
[Amit Varma]: You publish so many papers.
[Amit Varma]: I have not spoken to a guest who has the same frequency of papers as you do.
[Amit Varma]: It's like another woman makes roti and you publish a paper.
[Guest]: No, no.
[Guest]: It's not like that.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, if you interview Kartik, they're publishing in like a thousand big, big, big journals.
[Amit Varma]: Kartik is also an outlier in a way.
[Guest]: He's in a different league altogether.
[Guest]: He also talks to the state secretary and publishes journals.
[Guest]: Forget that.
[Guest]: What I'm trying to say is that I think that as a country, I think we really need to pay
[Guest]: attention to this problem a great deal more than we do, which is to maintain that level
[Guest]: of energy and vibrancy in institutes of higher education.
[Guest]: And I think the freedom of thought, I mean, the whole academic quest is about, okay, here's
[Guest]: an idea.
[Guest]: Let me see.
[Guest]: Maybe it'll lead to something.
[Guest]: Maybe it won't.
[Guest]: Maybe I'll find this.
[Guest]: Maybe I'll find that.
[Guest]: It's okay.
[Guest]: But let me just be unencumbered and let me think of possibilities without somebody seeing
[Guest]: an agenda in my work or, you know, why is she working on stunting?
[Guest]: Oh, is it, you know, some hidden agenda?
[Guest]: No, Baba.
[Guest]: There's no agenda.
[Guest]: I have some data.
[Guest]: I noticed a problem.
[Guest]: I'm working on it, you know.
[Guest]: And I think that all of us who, most of us, I would say, who analyze using data from Indian
[Guest]: problems, I think all with a view to make things better.
[Guest]: I don't think the attention of academics, broadly speaking, is to run any country down,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: All of us, certainly Indians living in India and Indians living abroad as well, who work
[Guest]: on India, they're trying to find solutions in their own ways, in different ways.
[Guest]: Often they disagree with each other.
[Guest]: But as a collective, I think the academic enterprises, the collective is not trying
[Guest]: to run down, you know, the country at all, you know.
[Guest]: But so I think that universities are and should remain, I mean, in an ideal world, universities
[Guest]: are and should remain spaces of free thought, free inquiry, disagreement, debate, you know,
[Guest]: healthy.
[Guest]: That's what university, I mean, I'm a university child, really, because my entire life I've
[Guest]: been associated with some university or the other, first as a child of a professor, then
[Guest]: as a teacher myself.
[Guest]: So that's the context I know the best.
[Amit Varma]: Do you say this because you worry that that is not the case or it is in threat?
[Guest]: I worry.
[Guest]: Yeah, definitely.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: We have like 20 minutes of time left and you've been very generous with your time so far.
[Amit Varma]: And as far as you know, your work is concerned, I just encourage all my listeners to just
[Amit Varma]: go out and engage with it directly.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, if we start talking about each of those subjects, like 10-10 hours of episodes
[Amit Varma]: will be done and surely we will meet again and talk again on the show as you've so kindly
[Amit Varma]: offered.
[Amit Varma]: So a few final questions.
[Amit Varma]: When was the last time you went to a fair?
[Guest]: Like what do you enjoy doing in your free time?
[Guest]: Really?
[Guest]: When did you go to a fair?
[Guest]: Well, when we, when I used to go to Rehmatpur, you know, to the village, every Thursday was
[Guest]: the Haat Bazaar, so we used to go and wear bangles and there used to be a special stall
[Guest]: that my grandfather would take very sweetly, would buy.
[Guest]: But yeah, I really haven't been to a fair.
[Guest]: I wish I had more free time than I do.
[Guest]: But my sort of most favorite things to do, one is I love watching movies, you know, so
[Guest]: I would love to go on for a movie whenever, always ready.
[Guest]: Aaj kal toh khair OTT aa gaya hai, so you know, that's another leisure activity that
[Guest]: I do.
[Guest]: I go to concerts as men quite, I mean, well, not enough.
[Guest]: I would like to go to more concerts than I can go to actually, but I listen to Hindustani
[Guest]: vocal music is my, between Hindustani and Karnataka, it's Hindustani, between vocal
[Guest]: and instrumental, it's vocal.
[Guest]: This is my like, one of my most favorite genres of music, but I like instrumental as well.
[Guest]: So I mean, Hindustani music, I really, really enjoy.
[Guest]: So I go to concerts whenever I can.
[Guest]: Again, less so now than I used to go earlier.
[Guest]: Theater has really gone down since my parents left Delhi, because earlier with them, because
[Guest]: my father would be always going to the theater, we would just go along with him.
[Guest]: I wish I could watch more theater than I do.
[Guest]: Theater and dance has gone down, I used to watch a lot of dance and, and theater, that's
[Guest]: gone down.
[Guest]: But music I still sort of try to keep up.
[Guest]: Then what?
[Guest]: I mean, I read not enough again, not, not enough time to read.
[Guest]: I feel I'm so tired by the evening that I'm trying to sort of dozing off, but I'm trying
[Guest]: to read.
[Guest]: I picked up a Hindi book after a really long time, Rej Samadhi, Bade Saalo Baad Hindi Padh
[Guest]: Rahi Hoon, Bohot Saalo Baad.
[Guest]: And I didn't realize that it's a difficult book to read.
[Guest]: You know, it's not written in the usual full full sentences type.
[Guest]: So I'm slightly little bit reading aloud every now and then, but I'm really enjoying it.
[Guest]: It's slow, the going is slow.
[Guest]: Marathi reading has more or less come to a standstill, but I always, I'm, I'm an optimist.
[Guest]: I always think things will change drastically.
[Guest]: So I have that on my to-do list, pata nahi kabhi hoga ki nahi hoga.
[Guest]: Otherwise, we travel a lot as a family and we are fond of, you know, going to places,
[Guest]: we go for walks.
[Guest]: Yeah, so I value leisure a lot.
[Guest]: And now I'm at a stage where I'm lucky enough that I can outsource some of the domestic
[Guest]: work and I have a family that's very supportive.
[Guest]: So a lot of the domestic, when we were younger, things were different, but so that does leave
[Guest]: me for leisure time.
[Guest]: That does leave leisure time.
[Guest]: And then I'm, you know, when I can, I take music lessons once a week.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: So when I cook, I like cooking.
[Guest]: So I, cooking is a hobby.
[Guest]: So I, I don't do everyday cooking now, lucky enough to be, to have reached that stage.
[Guest]: But I do occasional cooking, I bake a lot.
[Amit Varma]: I try different cuisines.
[Amit Varma]: What's your finest dish?
[Guest]: Oh my God.
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: You'll have to ask my family.
[Guest]: I bake a lot, you know, so I...
[Amit Varma]: Something baked?
[Guest]: I would say, I think so, because I do a lot of different cakes and different types of,
[Guest]: not a big bread expert, but I would say cakes and pies.
[Amit Varma]: Does baking play into the mathematical mindset because, I mean, obviously you have the mathematical
[Amit Varma]: mindset or baking, I cook, but I don't bake, in my case, because baking means everything
[Amit Varma]: is precision, precision numbers, minute, this measure, that measure, while I just like to
[Amit Varma]: kind of play around and mess around.
[Amit Varma]: So is there something to that stereotype?
[Guest]: I don't know whether it's my, I mean, first, I don't know whether I have a mathematical
[Guest]: mind.
[Guest]: And secondly, I don't know whether it's that, but I like the precision of baking.
[Guest]: And I think that it forces you to pay attention, whereas I do a lot of Indian cooking and different
[Guest]: types of cooking.
[Guest]: Maharashtrian, obviously, and my husband is Bengali, so I try dabble a little bit in Bengali
[Guest]: cuisine as well.
[Guest]: And I've learned other states of India as well.
[Guest]: But that's, you know, it's like Hindustani Gaana, which is, you know, you sort of develop
[Guest]: a raga, you develop a dish, it's kind of, and many people have drawn this analogy between
[Guest]: Indian cooking and Indian music.
[Guest]: Baking is very precise.
[Guest]: It has to be, you have to pay attention much more in baking than you do in Indian cooking.
[Guest]: So it appeals to me.
[Amit Varma]: When you look back on your life, what makes you proud?
[Guest]: Oh, gosh, hard to answer.
[Guest]: I mean, I guess none, none of it has, it's almost turned out the way because, you know,
[Guest]: I thought I was going to be a doctor.
[Guest]: So in a way, nothing has turned out.
[Guest]: I didn't plan too much, to be honest.
[Guest]: So things just kept happening.
[Guest]: And you know, it's that I have two Rafi songs that are my motto songs in my life, and one
[Guest]: of them is, Main Zindagi Ka Saath Nibhata Chala Gaya.
[Guest]: So it's Jo Mil Gaya Usi Ko Mukaddar Samajh Liya, Jo Kho Gaya Main Usko Bhulata Chala Gaya.
[Guest]: So I think that attitude helps one to adjust, you know, to whatever life.
[Guest]: I think I'm, I think I like the work that I do.
[Guest]: I like the fact that there's a body of work now at this age where I feel like I've begun
[Guest]: to understand a little bit, some of the problems.
[Guest]: I'll still say I'm on the surface, but I think it's nice to feel okay, okay, now I'm beginning
[Guest]: to see a little bit of the jigsaw coming together.
[Guest]: Many more dots, many more dots than anybody else.
[Guest]: But, you know, that feeling is nice.
[Guest]: I'm very proud of my daughter.
[Guest]: So you know, it's nice to see her as an adult and nice to interact with her as an adult.
[Guest]: I don't know how much of that is due to me or whether, you know, despite me, she's turned
[Guest]: out to be the way she is.
[Guest]: But whatever it is, it's just nice to have that.
[Guest]: Yeah, I think, overall, I, you know, just fortunate to have been born into the family
[Guest]: that I have born into.
[Guest]: Fortunate to have married into the family that I met.
[Guest]: So, you know, many, many strokes of luck, or whether all this is to be proud of or not,
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: Yeah, don't know whether I've answered your question.
[Amit Varma]: When you wake up in the morning, what do you look forward to the most?
[Amit Varma]: Like, what brings you just happiness of being in the moment?
[Guest]: Usually a song.
[Guest]: So I listen to something in the morning.
[Guest]: And it can be anything, I just very temperamental, I mean, I'm not very consistent about whatever,
[Guest]: but I do think of the music I'm going to listen to, not in a very conscious way, not in the
[Guest]: very sort of list making way, but it's just like, otherwise, actually, now, one has reached
[Guest]: a stage where there's lots of, lots of chota chota chota work that needs to be done, you
[Guest]: know, managing projects or some administrative work related to SIDA, the center that is at
[Guest]: Ashoka or some departmental email.
[Guest]: So there's a lot of this sort of admin type, admini type work, which is not my most favorite,
[Guest]: to be honest.
[Guest]: But it has to be done, it has to be done.
[Guest]: The volume of email, you know, I wake up, there's a volume of emails to write to.
[Guest]: So there is, but I realized that it comes with this, you know, you can't be choosy about
[Guest]: this.
[Guest]: I mean, you are where you are, and so all this is a part of the territory.
[Guest]: But you know, if I end the day, if I end the day on, okay, I wrote these, you know, I wrote
[Guest]: this, these paragraphs, or I finished this part of the paper, or I just even wrote a
[Guest]: popular article or whatever, I feel, I feel really good about that.
[Guest]: So when I do, when I get original writing done, those are my best days.
[Amit Varma]: Wonderful, I feel like we have a lot to talk about.
[Amit Varma]: I wanted to talk about your husband for that matter, and you know, how you've influenced
[Amit Varma]: each other.
[Amit Varma]: I wanted to talk about your Lata Mangeshkar debate with an academic in question.
[Amit Varma]: And we'll leave all of that for the next episode, unless you want to talk about any of them
[Amit Varma]: briefly and now.
[Amit Varma]: But the final question I'll end on, which I ask all my guests is, tell us about, in
[Amit Varma]: your case, songs, music, books, films, OTT shows, whatever stuff that you love, that
[Amit Varma]: just mean a lot to you.
[Amit Varma]: And they may not, they may or may not have anything to do with your work, that's irrelevant.
[Guest]: But just what do you, what do you feel emotionally close to?
[Guest]: It's a really tough question to answer.
[Guest]: Partly because I, I watch so much that I forget what I've watched.
[Guest]: But I think in terms of movies that I've watched recently, which I really, which really moved
[Guest]: me.
[Guest]: One was this Marathi film called Disciple, which is made by Chaitanya Tamane, the same
[Guest]: person who made Kote.
[Guest]: Kote also, I really, really liked.
[Amit Varma]: Kote was a masterpiece.
[Guest]: A masterpiece.
[Guest]: And I've watched it several times.
[Guest]: I, I recommend it to my students in Economics of Discrimination.
[Guest]: Disciple is in Sunny Music, beautiful, beautiful film.
[Guest]: OTT, we tend to watch a lot of crime thrillers.
[Guest]: So very much into murder mysteries and all that.
[Guest]: So Line of Duty, for example, is a show that we watched recently.
[Guest]: Not all, all episodes are available here, but in England, we watched it.
[Guest]: Fabulous, fabulous show, Line of Duty.
[Guest]: I'd missed Downton Abbey completely when it had first come.
[Guest]: And I wasn't particularly keen because it was a period drama, etc.
[Guest]: I said, I don't know who cares about the British aristocracy.
[Guest]: But when we started watching it through the pandemic, I realized that that's just the
[Guest]: setting, you know.
[Guest]: But there's so much more going on in that show.
[Guest]: So love that.
[Guest]: Bridgerton, oh my God, Bridgerton season two was my Hindi movie lover's delight, you know.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, people criticize Hindi movies for being suggestive and, you know, they would
[Guest]: show two flowers meeting each other and etc.
[Guest]: Bridgerton is completely that, by the way, Bridgerton season two.
[Guest]: But you know, so as I say, we've perfected that art of just the suggestive.
[Guest]: But the power of a suggestive romance where very little actually happens and you hold
[Guest]: the tension till the end.
[Guest]: For years, Hindi movies have been ridiculed for doing this.
[Guest]: Bridgerton has shown the power of, you know, how fabulous that chemistry and that anticipation
[Guest]: and the climax can be when that happens.
[Guest]: Love Bridgerton.
[Guest]: A lot of crime shows, actually Shetland, Line of Duty, then the Good Wife, what is the second
[Guest]: one?
[Amit Varma]: Good Wife and Good...
[Guest]: Not the Good Doctor.
[Guest]: I think I'm thinking of Damon Galgoot.
[Guest]: Good Wife.
[Guest]: And then Christine Baranski stars in the...
[Guest]: It's not a sequel to the Good Wife, but a lot of the characters of the Good Wife come
[Guest]: into the...
[Guest]: It's much more political, actually, by the way, it's sort of anti-Trump and it's a kind
[Guest]: of a continuation.
[Guest]: I mean, it's the same characters.
[Amit Varma]: The Good Fight?
[Amit Varma]: Good Fight.
[Guest]: The Good Fight.
[Guest]: So Good Wife and Good Fight, both of which I liked.
[Guest]: Then there's this Japanese show, Japanese BBC collaboration, Haji Giri, that we liked.
[Guest]: I'm just randomly trying to remember what I liked.
[Guest]: Because the one big tragedy of this sort of globalized Hindi movie format is that music
[Guest]: has gone out of Hindi films.
[Guest]: So Gangubai Kathiyawadi was so nice because it had songs, you know, real, real tragedy.
[Guest]: I mean, Hindi film songs used to be such a fabulous genre.
[Guest]: But anyway, there's enough of an archive there that one can keep on listening to.
[Guest]: So I listen to, I listen to podcasts on Hindi films as well, but I also listen to just songs.
[Amit Varma]: And can I trouble you to sing something as you did for my Twitter followers?
[Guest]: Oh my God, after five hours, six hours of talking?
[Amit Varma]: Just something soothing that you like, something that...
[Guest]: So even though Lata, I'm a big fan of Lata Mangeshkar, as you know, I don't sing a lot
[Guest]: of her songs because they are very difficult to sing.
[Guest]: So the song that I sang there was Asha Bhosle's song.
[Guest]: Let me try to sing, oh gosh.
[Unknown]: Tum apne charnon mein rakh lo mujh ko
[Unknown]: Tumhare charnon ka phool hoon main
[Unknown]: Main sar jhukae khadi hoon Preetam
[Unknown]: Ke jaise mandir mein lo diye ki
[Unknown]: Chhupa lo yoon dil mein pyaar mera
[Amit Varma]: Beautiful, I feel so fortunate.
[Guest]: But if you were going to make me sing, you should have done it in the beginning, not at the end.
[Amit Varma]: Because my voice is... I'll remember that for next time.
[Unknown]: Phir 5 ghante bas gaana hi chalega.
[Guest]: I think I should get you and Kartik together because he's also a singer and he loves Antakshari.
[Amit Varma]: I haven't heard him sing, you know, I should listen to his episodes where he's...
[Amit Varma]: The second episode he did with me on health care, he kind of sings at the end.
[Amit Varma]: And then I made him promise that we'll do an Antakshari next time.
[Unknown]: But this third time when he came on, he was recovering from Covid, his throat was messed up.
[Unknown]: So I think we should do an in-person Antakshari at some point in time and
[Amit Varma]: make you both come to my home studio in Bombay and just have a blast.
[Amit Varma]: Ashwini, thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: I'm so fortunate and honored that you gave me so much of your time and shared so many of your...
[Guest]: No, thank you. This was wonderful.
[Guest]: Thanks a lot for having me again on the show.
[Guest]: I enjoy your podcast, as you know.
[Guest]: It's been fabulous. Thanks.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, check out the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: Enter Rabbit Holes at will.
[Amit Varma]: Do go to your nearest bookstore, online or offline, and pick up the books Ashwini has written.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Ashwini on Twitter at A-S-H-W Deshpande.
[Amit Varma]: Ashv Deshpande. I'll also link it from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: A-S-H-W Deshpande.
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure she's trolling us with this Twitter handle because it's just so hard to say.
[Amit Varma]: But do follow her.
[Amit Varma]: And you can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Scene in the Unseen at sceneunseen.in. Thank you for listening.